Title: Sentence-Level Contextual Entrainment in Large Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.24077v1

Published Time: Wed, 24 Jun 2026 00:24:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# Sentence-Level Contextual Entrainment in Large Language Models 

Yang Liu Chenhui Chu 

Kyoto University 

yangliu@nlp.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp, chu@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp 

Abstract 

Contextual entrainment, which is a newly discovered phenomenon in large language models (LLMs), refers to the tendency of a model to assign higher probabilities to to-kens that appear in its context. In this work, we extend this phenomenon from the to-ken level to the sentence level by examin-ing the per-token mean log-probability of a sentence instead of the probabilities of indi-vidual tokens. We investigate sentence-level contextual entrainment across 26 LLMs from seven families and two datasets, which cover both subjective and objective tasks. We find that sentence-level contextual en-trainment exists. This means that the sen-tences in the prompt (even if they are coun-terfactual statements) can significantly in-crease their probability during model infer-ence time. As the model size increases, con-textual entrainment gradually decreases. We also find that contextual entrainment is con-trolled by 2% to 4% of the attention heads. Turning off these attention heads can effec-tively mitigate contextual entrainment with-out hurting the model’s performance. 1

1 Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs) have demon-strated remarkable in-context learning (ICL) capa-bilities, enabling them to effectively leverage con-textual information provided in the prompt with-out any parameter updates (Brown et al., 2020). Due to its simplicity, flexibility, and outstanding empirical performance, ICL has become an impor-tant approach for numerous natural language pro-cessing tasks, spanning a wide range of domains from classification (Zhao et al., 2021), question-answering (Li et al., 2023), reasoning (Wei et al., 2022), and code generation (Chen et al., 2021).      

> 1Our code is available at https://github. com/ku-nlp/Sentence-Level_Contextual_ Entrainment_in_LLMs .

To understand how ICL works, Dai et al. (2023) explain it as implicitly performing gradient de-scent, with the model acting as a meta-optimizer that produces meta-gradients from the demonstra-tion examples. From a circuit perspective, this ability has been traced to induction heads that complete patterns by copying relevant tokens from the context as the model’s response (Olsson et al., 2022; Crosbie and Shutova, 2025). These studies mostly explain how models benefit from contex-tual information in prompts; however, how models misuse contextual information in prompts is com-paratively less understood. Recently, Niu et al. (2025) uncovered a striking phenomenon they term contextual entrainment : an LLM systematically increases the probabilities of any token that has appeared in the context, includ-ing tokens that have no semantic connection to the subsequent query. As shown in Figure 1a, given the context “Paris is part of France.” followed by the query “Which country is Tokyo in?” the next token probability of “France” (a token from the context) rises sharply above its no-context base-line, even though the correct next token is “Japan.” Through a differentiable masking analysis, Niu et al. (2025) traced this phenomenon to a small set of attention heads and demonstrated that setting their outputs to zero can reduce entrainment. Niu et al. (2025)’s analysis, however, is re-stricted to the token level: it quantifies the increase in the probabilities of a single token at the position of the next token predicted by the model. Sen-tences are the more common unit of input and out-put in LLM use; we therefore extend token-level contextual entrainment to the sentence level. As shown in Figure 1b, under the same prompt above, the entire sentence “Paris is part of France.” re-ceives a sharp probability increase as a candidate continuation—even though it is factually incorrect about Tokyo—while the probability of the correct answer “Tokyo is part of Japan.” is decreased.  

> arXiv:2606.24077v1 [cs.CL] 23 Jun 2026 Prompt:
> Context: Paris is part of France.
> Query: Which country is Tokyo in?
> Output next -token logits:
> No -context With -context
> Japan
> France
> Paris
> Korea
> 0.80
> 0.02
> 0.01
> 0.04
> 0.70
> 0.22
> 0.10
> 0.04
> LLM
> contextual entrainment

(a) Token-level contextual entrainment (Niu et al., 2025): at the next-token position, in-prompt tokens (e.g., “France”) receive a large probability increase. Prompt:    

> Context: Paris is part of France.
> Query: Which country is Tokyo in?
> Tokyo is part of Japan.
> Paris is part of France.
> Tokyo is part of China.
> Tokyo is part of Korea.
> 0.70
> 0.10
> 0.05
> 0.04
> 0.45
> 0.40
> 0.05
> 0.04 contextual entrainment
> Output sentence probability:
> LLM No -context With -context

(b) Sentence-level contextual entrainment (Ours): over candidate full-sentence continuations, the in-prompt sentence (“Paris is part of France.”) re-ceives a large probability increase. 

Figure 1: Examples of token-level and sentence-level contextual entrainment. Our work differs from prior studies (Niu et al., 2025; Kukreja et al., 2026) in the following main points. First, we study contextual entrainment at the sentence-level rather than the token-level, an extension that more closely matches how in-formation accumulates during realistic generation. Second, whereas Niu et al. (2025) reports results for a single model (Grattafiori et al., 2024) and the panel of Kukreja et al. (2026) is limited to the older Cerebras-GPT (Dey et al., 2023) and Pythia (Biderman et al., 2023) families, we run experiments on 26 models spanning seven fami-lies. Third, existing work measures entrainment only on factual recall tasks such as LRE (Hernan-dez et al., 2024), while we introduce the subjec-tive task WVS (Haerpfer et al., 2022) as a second probe. Fourth, beyond the entrainment heads tied to individual relations, we identify a set of shared heads common to all relations. We are the first to identify heads that generalize across relations. We focus on the following three research ques-tions. RQ1: Does the contextual entrainment phe-nomenon also exist at the sentence level? We investigate this in both subjective and objective tasks. RQ2: How does contextual entrainment scale with model size? As LLMs encode sentences through contextual representations whose richness scales with model capacity, sentence-level entrain-ment may vary with model size. RQ3: Do LLMs have a small set of entrainment heads that can be turned off to mitigate contextual entrainment with-out hurting task performance? Our main contributions are as follows: 1) We extend token-level contextual entrainment to the sentence level by representing the probability of the model’s response with its per-token mean log-probability (§2). 2) We extend differentiable at-tention head masking to the sentence level (§3). 3) 

Our experiments demonstrate that sentence-level contextual entrainment exists; this entrainment persists even when the sentence in the prompt is a counterfactual statement associated with the query (§5.1). 4) By analyzing different sizes of four model families, we find that the contextual en-trainment phenomenon is related to model size: as model size increases, contextual entrainment grad-ually decreases. In contrast, the distraction on the response that does not appear in the context in-creases with model size (§5.2). 5) We identify a sparse set of shared heads: turning off only 2% to 4% of the attention heads can effectively mitigate contextual entrainment without hurting model per-formance (§5.3). 

2 Background and Formalisation 

2.1 Notations 

Let M be an LLM parameterized by θ, with vo-cabulary V. For any token sequence x, M pro-duces logits z = hθ(x), and we write its pre-dictive distribution as π = Softmax (z), with 

log π(w | x) denoting the log-probability assigned to a candidate next token w ∈ V .For a token sequence y = (y1, . . . , y L), the model’s log-probability in generating y after the token sequence x decomposes by the chain rule: 

log π(y | x) = 

> L

X

> i=1

log π(yi | x, y <i ), (1) where y<i = ( y1, . . . , y i−1) and y<1 are empty. Inputs The input can be split into two parts: • A query q, such as “Tokyo is part of” (the next-token completion style introduced by Niu et al. (2025)) or “Which country is Tokyo in?” (for our sentence-level queries); • A context c, an additional segment prepended to q, such as “Paris is part of France.” We denote the prompt by p, formed by concate-nating c and q in that order, and use the comma notation c, q inside conditioning expressions to de-note this concatenation. 2 The contrast between 

log π(· | q) and log π(· | c, q ) is the central ob-ject of study throughout this work. 

2.2 Token-Level Contextual Entrainment 

Let T (c) be the set of tokens that appear in the context c:

T (c) = {w ∈ V : w appears at least once in c}.

(2) The contextual entrainment phenomenon concerns how token w in T (c) affects the log-probability of the model’s next token. The log-probability in-crease at the token level can be expressed as: 

∆ log π(w | c, q ) := log π(w | c, q )−log π(w | q).

(3) Eq. (3) measures the change in the log-probability of generating w ∈ c when context c is concate-nated before query q. Positive values indicate that concatenating the context c increases the probabil-ity of the next token w.Next, we formalize the token-level contextual entrainment phenomenon: 

Hypothesis 1. For every token w ∈ T (c), the log-probability of the model’s next token w is system-atically increased by concatenating the context c

to the query q:

∀ w ∈ T (c) : E[∆ log π(w | c, q )] > 0, (4) where the expectation is taken over the data distri-bution of (c, q ) pairs. This restates Niu et al. (2025)’s finding in log-probability form. The original definition is ex-pressed in terms of probabilities; for comparisons at the token level, the two are equivalent.  

> 2Several notations for sequence concatenation appear in the existing work (e.g., Liu and Chu (2025) uses ⊕), but we follow the comma convention adopted in Niu et al. (2025).

2.3 Sentence-Level Contextual Entrainment 

We now extend Hypothesis 1 from a single token to a sentence. Let y = ( y1, . . . , y L) ∈ V be a sentence of tokens that appears as a contiguous substring of the context c (so yi ∈ T (c) for ev-ery i). The quantity of interest is how the model’s log-probability in generating y as a continuation changes when the prompt is extended from q to 

c, q . The log-probability increase at the sentence level can be defined as: 

∆ log π(y | c, q ) := log π(y | c, q ) − log π(y | q).

(5) We focus on cases where the response y is exactly the context c and investigate whether the model’s log-probability in generating y also increases in the expectation when the context c is concatenated before the query q.Applying Eq. (1) to each term in Eq. (5), and then subtracting them: 

∆ log π(y | c, q ) = 

> L

X

> i=1

h

log π(yi | c, q, y <i )

− log π(yi | q, y <i )

i

.

(6) This means that the increase in log-probability at the sentence level is exactly equal to the sum of the increases in log-probability for each token in the sentence. Each term in Eq. (6) takes the form of a token-level increase, where the prompt is c, q, y <i :

∆ log π(yi | c, q, y <i ) = log π(yi | c, q, y <i )

− log π(yi | q, y <i ). (7) 

Proposition 1. If the model’s response y equals (or is a subsequence of) the context c in the prompt 

p = ( c, q ), then under Hypothesis 1, 

E[∆ log π(y | c, q )] > 0. (8) 

Proof sketch. Given that y equals (or is a sub-sequence of) c, every token yi belongs to T (c).For each position i, Hypothesis 1 applied with token w = yi and prompt p = c, q, y <i (not-ing yi ∈ T (c) ⊆ T (p)) gives E[∆ log π(yi |

c, q, y <i )] > 0, i.e., each summand in Eq. (6) is positive in expectation. Applying the expectation linearly to Eq. (6) yields: 

E[∆ log π(y | c, q )] =

> L

X

> i=1

E[∆ log π(yi | c, q, y <i )] > 0. (9) 3 Sentence-Level Entrainment Head Discovery 

Following Niu et al. (2025) we identify the at-tention heads responsible for contextual entrain-ment via differentiable masking (De Cao et al., 2020). A learnable Gumbel-sigmoid gate ml,h ∈{0, 1} (Jang et al., 2017) is attached to every atten-tion head h at every layer l, scaling the head’s out-put; setting ml,h = 0 multiplies that head’s con-tribution to the residual stream by zero. During training, the gate is computed as 

ml,h = 1



σ

 ℓl,h + gτ



> 12



, (10) where σ(x) = 11+ e−x is the sigmoid function, g is Logistic noise, τ ∈ (0 , ∞) is a temperature hyper-parameter, and 1[·] is the indicator function; the gradient bypasses the discretization through the straight-through estimator (Bengio et al., 2013). At inference time, we deterministically set ml,h =

1[ℓl,h > 0] . In this section, we use the fac-tual statements as the context, denoted as c. The model’s no-context natural response is r, evaluat-ing c and r under the same with-context prompt: 

Lc = 1

> |c|

P|c| 

> i=1

log π(ci | c, q, c <i ) and Lr =

> 1
> |r|

P|r| 

> i=1

log π(ri | c, q, r <i ). The mask logits ℓl,h 

are trained to minimize: 

L = softplus( Lc − Lr)+ α · KL  Pnm ∥ Pm

 + λ · 1

> |H|

X

> l,h

 1 − σ(ℓl,h ).

(11) We wrap Lc − Lr with a softplus function (Dugas et al., 2000) so that the mask is no longer modified once Lc < L r, as continued modification in this regime harms the decoder (Gao et al., 2023). Put simply, the optimization halts as soon as the model prefers r over c. Pnm is the next-token distribution of the model without context, and Pm is the distri-bution obtained under the same condition with the current mask applied. The KL divergence (Kull-back and Leibler, 1951) pulls Pnm and Pm closer to each other, a smaller value indicates a smaller dis-crepancy between the two distributions (Liu and Hou, 2023; Liu, 2024). ℓl,h is the learnable mask logit of the h-th attention head in the l-th layer. Here σ(ℓl,h ) denotes the probability that the head is retained, while 1 − σ(ℓl,h ) denotes the probabil-ity that it is turned off. The third term encourages the model to turn off fewer heads. α and λ are hyperparameters. 

4 Experimental Settings 

4.1 Datasets 

We evaluate the contextual entrainment phe-nomenon on two datasets, covering both objective and subjective tasks: 

Linearity of Relation Decoding (LRE; Her-nandez et al., 2024) LRE contains 47 relations across four categories ( factual associations , com-monsense knowledge , implicit biases , linguistic knowledge ), each contains facts in the triplet for-mat: ⟨source, target, relation ⟩. For example, 

⟨T okyo, Japan, city in country ⟩ corresponds to the fact that Tokyo is part of Japan . We apply the filtering rules from Niu et al. (2025) to keep only 16 relations covering 3,688 samples. For each re-tained relation, we keep at most 50 samples: re-lations with more than 50 instances are downsam-pled to 50, and the others are kept in full. If the re-sulting count is odd, one sample is discarded. The remaining samples of each relation are then split in a 1:1 ratio into a context pool (used as the context) and a query pool (used as the query). This results in 594 triples in total: 297 in the context pool and 297 in the query pool. Each triple can be assem-bled into a context and a query for the contextual entrainment experiment. 

World Values Survey (WVS; Haerpfer et al., 2022) The WVS is a global survey of human val-ues; we use the publicly released Wave 7 (2017– 2022), which contains opinion items on social, po-litical, and ethical topics. We utilize the dataset filtered from Liu et al. (2026)’s work. After re-moving items whose answer scales were not natu-rally binary, we retained 135 items. Each item is paired with two opposing opinion statements gen-erated by GPT-5.4: 3 a support statement to express the positive opinion, and an oppose statement to express the negative opinion. We split these 135 items into a context pool containing 5 items and a test set containing 130 items. 

4.2 Prompts 

In this section, we introduce the exact prompt for-mats used in our experiments. We use a consis-tent prompt format in LRE and WVS: A prompt consists of two components: (i) Context and (ii) 

Query . Then, the model is required to generate a 

Response in the form of a sequence of tokens. 

> 3https://openai.com/

For the LRE dataset, the prompt is as follows: 

> # Context
> Paris is part of France.
> # Query
> Which country is Tokyo in?
> # Response
> <Response>

The role markers ( # Context , # Query , # Re-sponse ) are illustrative only and are not part of the actual prompt. The query is a question that asks for the target of a relation instance, and the model is required to generate the answer as the re-sponse. We use two types of context. The con-text is a relation statement expressed with a fixed sentence template. We construct two types of re-lation statements for each query: a factual state-ment and a counterfactual statement. A factual statement comes from the same relation as the query, but its source and target are different from those in the query; for example, when the query is “Which country is Tokyo in?”, the context could be “Paris is part of France.” A counterfactual state-ment keeps the source of the query but replaces the 

target with an incorrect one, such as “Tokyo is part of France.” For the WVS dataset, the prompt is as follows: 

> # Context
> I would mention immigrants or foreign workers be-cause I want neighbors who share my language, cus-toms, and way of life, so daily contact feels easier and less stressful.
> # Query
> How important is family in your life?
> # Response
> <Response>

The query q is to ask about the respondent’s opinion, e.g., “How important is family in your life?” The context is an opinion statement used to respond to the query q′; the opinion statement is either a support statement or an oppose statement for the query q′. The context can also be removed to obtain a no-context baseline. 

Response Categories To systematically charac-terize the effect of the context c on model gener-ation, we partition the evaluated responses r for each query q into three categories: • Context response: the response is identical to the context ( r = c); that is, the model is re-quired to reproduce a sentence that appeared in the prompt; • Correct response: the response is the correct answer to the query q and is not equal to the context ( r̸ = c and r = correct); 4

• Incorrect response: the response neither equals the context nor is the correct answer (r̸ = c and r̸ = correct). The exact form of the correct response depends on the dataset. For LRE, it comprises both the gold response to the query and the no-context natural response produced by the model itself. For WVS, it comprises the matching support or oppose state-ment associated with the query and the no-context natural response produced by the model. The exact form of the incorrect response also depends on the dataset. For LRE, it is the alterna-tive of the pair {factual statement, counterfactual statement} not used as the context. For WVS, it is the alternative of the pair {support statement, op-pose statement} that is not used as the context. 

4.3 Metrics Contextual Entrainment We measure this ef-fect as the difference in the log-probability that the model’s response is sentence s, under two prompt-ing conditions: when the prompt is the concatena-tion of context c (the same as the sentence s) and query q, versus when the prompt consists of the query q alone. Formally, 

E(c | c, q ) = 1

|c|

> |c|

X

> i=1

log π(ci | c, q, c <i )

− 1

|c|

> |c|

X

> i=1

log π(ci | q, c <i ),

(12) where |c| denotes the number of tokens in the con-text c, and ci is its i-th token, so the average is taken over the |c| teacher-forced per-token log-probabilities of c.

Distraction Whereas Eq. (12) measures the ten-dency of the model to reproduce the context sen-tence itself, distraction measures the effect of the context c on the log-probability of a response r

that is not equal to the context ( r̸ = c). Formally, 

D(r | c, q ) = 1

|r|

> |r|

X

> i=1

log π(ri | c, q, r <i )

− 1

|r|

> |r|

X

> i=1

log π(ri | q, r <i ),

(13) 

> 4In our work, the context is never the correct answer.

where the response r may correspond to the cor-rect or reasonable answer to the query or any other candidate sentence distinct from the context. Note that our usage is broader than the behavioral no-tion of distraction in prior work (Shi et al., 2023): Our distraction metric is a neutral measure of how the context shifts the probability of a response not equal to the context, and distraction in the conven-tional sense corresponds to the special case where distraction is negative for a correct response. 

4.4 Models 

All experiments use open-weight decoder-only LLMs from Hugging Face. For RQ1 and RQ3, we use Gemma-2-9B (Team et al., 2024), Llama-3.1-8B (Grattafiori et al., 2024), and Mistral-7B (Jiang et al., 2023). Because the sentences we study are produced by models and may therefore be affected by instruction tuning (Kuribayashi et al., 2024), we compare the base and instruction-tuned variants of three model families. For RQ2, we use multiple sizes of four model families: Llama-2-7B/13B/70B (Touvron et al., 2023), Qwen2.5-0.5B/1.5B/3B/7B/14B/32B/72B (Qwen et al., 2025), Qwen3-0.6B/1.7B/4B/8B/14B/32B (Yang et al., 2025), and Gemma-3-1B/4B/12B/27B (Team et al., 2025). We disable Qwen3’s thinking mode at inference time so that the scored continuation does not include the reasoning trace. 

4.5 Mask Training 

We optimize the mask logits with AdamW (Loshchilov and Hutter, 2017) at alearning rate of 0.1, with α = 1 .0 and λ = 2 .0

for at most 500 epochs, with early stopping once the development set shows no improvement over 20 consecutive epochs. For each relation, we split the samples into training, development, and test sets at an 80/10/10 ratio, and within every set, we form (c, q ) combinations by pairing each sample’s statement as the context c with another sample’s question as the query q. We train a separate mask for each LRE relation, so each model produces 16 relation-specific masks (we call these masked heads per-relation heads ). From these 16 per-relation masks, we derive a single set of shared heads for each model: the heads turned off by at least 8 of the 16 per-relation masks, i.e., the heads consistently identified as entrainment-relevant across relations. factual statement  

> counter- statement
> gold response
> model response
> factual statement
> counter- statement
> gold response
> model response
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> Δ Mean Log Probability
> factual statement counter- statement
> Response
> Context
> LRE

Figure 2: Sentence-level contextual entrainment on Llama-3.1-8B ( RQ1 ). Context indicates the context type, which supports two settings: fac-tual and counterfactual (counter-); Response indi-cates the text on which the log probability is com-puted. The red bars represent contextual entrain-ment, and the blue bars represent distraction. 

5 Experiments 

5.1 Sentence-Level Contextual Entrainment (RQ1) Method. We examine how the mean log-probability that the model assigns to the response tokens changes when the context c is concate-nated to the query q. For the LRE dataset, we compute accuracy through string matching be-tween the gold response and the model’s natu-ral response. To evaluate the model’s natural re-sponse on the WVS dataset, we classify its po-larity through the OpenAI embedding API (text-embedding-3-small), 5 computing the cosine simi-larity between the natural response and the support and oppose statements associated with the query. Then, we assign the polarity of the statement with the higher similarity as the polarity of the natural response. 

Results. Figure 2 reports the mean log-probability shift of Llama-3.1-8B on the LRE dataset. Results on other models and the WVS dataset also show the same pattern. Table 1 

> 5https://platform.openai.com/docs/ guides/embeddings

Gemma-2-9B Llama-3.1-8B Mistral-7B Avg. Base IT Base IT Base IT 

no-context 57 .0 80 .8 79 .4 79 .2 67 .4 80 .8 74 .1

factual statement 7.6−49 .4 74 .3−6.6 44 .7−34 .7 73 .0−6.2 54 .4−12 .9 81 .4+0 .6 55 .9−18 .2

counterfactual statement 29 .3−27 .8 69 .0−11 .8 22 .4−57 .0 55 .3−23 .9 38 .1−29 .3 64 .6−16 .2 46 .5−27 .6

self 57 .6+0 .6 53 .2−27 .6 75 .4−4.0 80 .8+1 .6 69 .0+1 .6 82 .8+2 .1 69 .8−4.3

Avg. 31 .5−25 .5 65 .5−15 .3 47 .5−31 .9 69 .7−9.5 53 .8−13 .5 76 .3−4.5 57 .4−16 .7

Table 1: Model accuracy on the LRE dataset ( RQ1 ). “no-context” denotes the model’s natural response without context; “factual statement” uses the factual context; “counterfactual statement” uses the coun-terfactual context; “self” uses the model’s own “no-context” natural response as context. Base denotes the base model and IT the instruction-tuned model. Blue shading marks the context condition with the smallest effect on accuracy. Red shading marks the condition that reduces accuracy the most.                                                   

> Gemma-2-9B Llama-3.1-8B Mistral-7B Avg. Base IT Base IT Base IT
> ρns
> cs83 .884 .479 .880 .580 .284 .182 .1
> ρns
> co73 .582 .172 .267 .867 .577 .073 .4
> ρns
> self 99 .081 .899 .093 .998 .993 .594 .4
> ρno
> cs52 .958 .150 .654 .247 .266 .354 .9
> ρno
> co63 .966 .855 .666 .759 .568 .963 .6
> ρno
> self 87 .152 .881 .279 .282 .192 .179 .1

Table 2: Model opinion consistency on the WVS Dataset ( RQ1 ). ρxy denotes the consistency of opinion polarity between the model’s natural re-sponse (of polarity x) given context y and its nat-ural response without context; cs and co denote contexts that support and oppose the statement, while ns and no denote whether the model’s natu-ral response is closer to the supporting or the op-posing statement relative to query q. “self” uses the model’s own “no-context” natural response as context. Each cell is the percentage of queries whose with-context opinion still matches the no-context opinion. Yellow shading marks the con-text condition with the smallest effect on opinion consistency. Gray shading marks the condition with the largest effect (the context whose polar-ity opposes the model’s natural response). shows the effect of context on the accuracy of the model’s natural response. 

(i) Sentence-level contextual entrainment ex-ists, including under counterfactual statements. 

In Figure 2, the cases where the response equals the context are instances of contextual entrain-ment. We find that sentence-level contextual en-trainment exists, meaning that a sentence appear-ing in the prompt receives a higher probability in the model response. Factual and counterfactual statements also raise each other’s probability, and this effect can even exceed the probability gain on the gold answer. This is counterintuitive, as it indi-cates that counterfactual statements (incorrect ex-amples) can also increase the probability that the model continues to generate the correct responses. The observation is consistent with prior work re-porting that few-shot demonstrations with incor-rect labels still improve model performance (Min et al., 2022; Liu and Chu, 2025). The probability of the model’s natural response is distracted, re-gardless of whether the context is factual or coun-terfactual, which confirms that the influence of the context on the model output genuinely exists. 

(ii) The shifts in log-probability translate into behavior-level changes in correctness un-der free generation. Tables 1 and 2 report how different context types affect the model’s natural response: accuracy on the LRE dataset and po-larity consistency on the WVS dataset. On the LRE dataset, every model decreases a substan-tial portion of its accuracy under factual context; the decrease is larger under counterfactual con-text, where Llama-3.1-8B drops from 79.4% to 22.4%; accuracy falls even when the context is the model’s own natural response. On the WVS dataset, the consistency of the opinion’s polarity decreases most when the polarity of the opinion statement in the context conflicts with that of the model’s natural response. However, even a same-polarity context, or one that reuses the model’s natural response itself, still affects the model’s opinion consistency, and natural responses that take an opposing polarity are more susceptible. Taken together, the context is not a spurious ef-1B 4B 16B 64B 

> Number of Parameters
> 3.0
> 3.2
> 3.4
> 3.6
> 3.8
> 4.0
> WVS

(a) Support statement. 1B 4B 16B 64B  

> Number of Parameters
> 1.5
> 2.0
> 2.5
> LRE
> Factual context
> Counterfactual context

(b) Counter- and Factual. 1B 4B 16B 64B  

> Number of Parameters
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> WVS

(c) Support response. 1B 4B 16B 64B  

> Number of Parameters
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> WVS

(d) Oppose statement. 

Figure 3: Model-size effects on sentence-level contextual entrainment ( RQ2 ). The context for (a), (c), and (d) is support statement ; the caption represents the response. (b) is that the response equals the context, under factual and counterfactual contexts. Model family encoding: Llama-2, Qwen3, Qwen2.5, Gemma-3. The y-axis shows the “ ∆ Mean Log Probability” under a specific context and response setting. fect at the log-probability level but instead affects the opinion polarity of the model’s generation. 

(iii) Instruction-tuning mitigates the effects of context. As shown in Table 1, instruction tun-ing substantially mitigates the influence of con-text on model performance on the LRE dataset: the base-model drops of -25.5%, -31.9%, and -13.5% shrink to -15.3%, -9.5%, and -4.5% after tuning. Yet, although the instruction-tuned models cut the average degradation by 40% to 70% within each family, they never eliminate it. On WVS (Ta-ble 2), instruction tuning yields inconsistent ef-fects across families relative to the base models, lowering consistency on Gemma-2-9B while rais-ing it on Llama-3.1-8B and Mistral-7B; the high-est average consistency it attains is only 80.3%. Contextual entrainment, therefore, persists after instruction tuning, which shows that it is not an artifact of an insufficiently aligned base model. 

5.2 Model-size Effects on Contextual Entrainment (RQ2) Motivation. Because LLMs are contextual rep-resentation models (Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2018), sentence-level contextual entrainment, unlike token-level contex-tual entrainment, depends on the representational capacity of the model. In this section, we there-fore report the contextual entrainment and distrac-tion for 20 models of varying sizes drawn from four model families (Llama-2, Qwen2.5, Qwen3, and Gemma-3), evaluated across a range of con-text and response settings. 

Results. Figure 3 reports how the log-probability change of the response, induced by the appearance of the context in the prompt, varies across three context and response settings on the LRE and WVS dataset. A larger value indicates that the context contributes more to raising the probability of the response. 

(i) Contextual entrainment decreases as model size increases. Figure 3a shows that con-textual entrainment decreases as the model size in-creases: on Qwen3, it falls from 3.91 at 0.6B to 3.35 at 32B. On LRE (Figure 3b), the factual con-text follows the same decreasing trend, whereas the counterfactual context deviates from this pat-tern, with the value instead increasing slightly with model size. This indicates that the model re-sists repeating counterfactual context, and this re-sistance is more pronounced in smaller models. 

(ii) Distraction increases as model size in-creases. Figures 3c and 3d illustrate this trend in two types of distracted responses. For the re-sponse matching the query (Figure 3c), the influ-ence of the support statement on the support re-sponse increases with model size: on Qwen3, it rises from 0.06 at 0.6B to 0.27 at 32B, and the same trend holds for Qwen2.5, Gemma-3, and Llama-2; For a response that neither appears in the prompt nor matches the query (Figure 3d), the probability gain likewise increases with model size within every model family, from roughly 0.4 Gemma-2-9B Llama-3.1-8B Mistral-7B Avg. Base IT Base IT Base IT 

Unmasked +2 .42 +2 .32 +2 .11 +2 .14 +1 .67 +1 .48 +2 .02 

Random head +2 .41 −0.01 +2 .31 −0.01 +2 .11 −0.00 +2 .14 +0 .01 +1 .65 −0.03 +1 .47 −0.01 +2 .01 −0.01 

Per-relation head +0 .56 −1.86 +0 .69 −1.63 −0.31 −2.42 −0.02 −2.16 −0.14 −1.81 −0.48 −1.96 +0 .05 −1.97 

Shared head +1 .26 −1.16 +1 .24 −1.09 +1 .46 −0.65 +1 .06 −1.08 +0 .70 −0.97 +0 .93 −0.55 +1 .11 −0.91 

Table 3: Contextual entrainment averaged over 16 LRE relations ( RQ3 ). “Unmasked” is the original model without any attention heads masked. “Random head” is averaged over 10 seeds of random head sets matched in size to the set of shared heads. “Per-relation head” uses each relation’s own trained mask; “Shared head” uses the shared head mask (2%-4% of attention heads). Green shading marks the per-relation mask, which almost entirely eliminates contextual entrainment; Orange shading marks the shared head mask, which roughly halves entrainment while preserving model performance. 

Gemma-2-9B Llama-3.1-8B Mistral-7B Avg. Prompt Mask Base IT Base IT Base IT 

w/o context Unmasked 61 .5 84 .8 80 .1 82 .8 71 .0 84 .7 77 .5

Random head 56.9 −4.6 84 .8−0.0 73 .1−6.9 82.8 −0.0 59 .0−11 .9 83 .7−1.0 73 .4−4.1

Per-relation head 39 .9−21 .6 82 .6−2.2 74 .8−5.3 78 .4−4.4 66 .0−5.0 82 .7−2.0 70 .7−6.8

Shared head 52 .8−8.7 85.6 +0 .8 77.4 −2.7 82 .2−0.7 68.3 −2.7 84.7 −0.1 75.2 −2.3

w/ context Unmasked 7.8 75 .6 60 .5 77 .7 56 .9 85 .4 60 .7

Random head 10.4 +2 .6 74 .5−1.1 56 .9−3.6 75 .5−2.2 51 .6−5.3 84 .0−1.4 58 .8−1.8

Per-relation head 9.5+1 .7 82.2 +6 .6 62 .2+1 .6 78 .7+1 .0 58 .3+1 .3 81 .5−3.9 62 .1+1 .4

Shared head 9.3+1 .5 81 .0+5 .4 64.9 +4 .4 82.2 +4 .5 64.9 +7 .9 84.4 −1.0 64.5 +3 .8

Table 4: Free-generation accuracy on the 16 LRE relations ( RQ3 ). “w/o context” is the bare query (capa-bility preservation); “w/ context” is the query preceded by the factual statement (entrainment robustness). Subscripts give the change in accuracy relative to the “Unmasked” row. Bold marks the highest free-generation accuracy among the three masking strategies. to 0.6 at the smallest size to roughly 0.8 to 1.0 at the largest. We interpret this as follows: as the context and the response are expressions drawn from a similar topic, a larger model is better able to extract topical or stylistic features from the context and use them to raise the probability of a topically similar response; when the response equals the context, however, token-level entrainment over-rides this representational effect. We can con-clude that smaller models rely more on token-level contextual entrainment, while larger mod-els rely more on representation-level contextual entrainment. 5.3 Entrainment Heads (RQ3) Results. After identifying the entrainment heads through differentiable masking, we validate whether turning them off suppresses contextual entrainment and at what cost to task performance. 

(i) Only 2%-4% of attention heads suffice to suppress contextual entrainment. Table 3 shows that a random masking baseline that uses the same number of attention heads barely affects contex-tual entrainment (2.01 on average, essentially un-changed from the unmasked model). Per-relation masking, in contrast, almost entirely eliminates it, driving contextual entrainment down to roughly zero (+0.05 on average, slightly negative on sev-eral models). Masking the shared heads roughly halves the contextual entrainment of every model: when no heads are masked, the average contextual entrainment is 2.02; however, when only 2%–4% of the shared heads are masked, this value drops to 1.11. The shared entrainment heads are therefore both sparse and general across relations. 

(ii) Masking the shared heads barely hurts model performance. Table 4 shows how mask-ing heads affects accuracy in the no-context and with-context settings. In the no-context setting, masking the shared heads costs only a few per-centage points of accuracy on average (-2.3), well below the loss incurred by per-relation masking (-6.8) and by a random mask of the same size (-4.1). The performance drop primarily occurred in the base models, whereas the instruction-tuned variants across all three families retain essentially all of their no-context accuracy when the shared heads are masked. Shared heads can therefore be disabled at deployment without retraining or sac-rificing the performance of the underlying model. In the with-context setting, the unmasked model is distracted by the context, and its accuracy falls below the no-context level. Masking the shared heads improves with-context accuracy on five of the six models (+1.5 to +7.9), and the recovery is most complete on the instruction-tuned variants, whose accuracy returns to within a few percentage points of the no-context ceiling. A random mask of the same size produces no such recovery, which confirms that the effect comes from these specific heads rather than from the general perturbation of removing an arbitrary 2% to 4% of the heads. 

6 Related Work 

Contextual Entrainment and Distraction. 

LLMs are known to be susceptible to distraction: irrelevant or misleading content in the prompt can derail an otherwise correct prediction. Shi et al. (2023) shows that adding a single irrelevant clause to grade-school math problems substantially de-grades the accuracy of models that otherwise solve them reliably. This vulnerability has drawn particular attention in retrieval-augmented gen-eration, where retrieved passages are inevitably noisy: irrelevant or distracting documents in the context degrade answer quality, and models need to be explicitly hardened against them (Yoran et al., 2023; Cuconasu et al., 2024). The Contex-tual Entrainment phenomenon describes how an LLM increases the probability of any token that appears in the prompt, regardless of its relevance to the query. Niu et al. (2025) attributes this entrainment to a small set of entrainment heads. While their finding is novel, they experiment on only a single model, Llama-3.1-8B. (Kukreja et al., 2026) instead studies how contextual en-trainment scales across models of different sizes, yet their analysis is confined to small and medium models. Both Niu et al. (2025) and Kukreja et al. (2026) measure the logit increases of a single next-token candidate, whereas in actual gener-ation, entrainment accumulates over an entire sentence. Prior work also tests entrainment only on the LRE dataset, which leaves open whether the phenomenon shapes subjective behavior as well. We add the WVS dataset as a second probe and show that entrainment impacts both factual answers and expressed opinions. 

Attention Heads and Mechanistic Inter-pretability. Mechanistic interpretability has identified attention-head circuits that implement specific functions in LLMs. (Elhage et al., 2021) and Olsson et al. (2022) identify induction heads, which complete patterns of the form “AB . . . A → B” and drive in-context learning, and (Crosbie and Shutova, 2025) extend this analysis to real-world LLMs. Beyond pattern completion, narrower circuits have been localized to specific tasks, as in the indirect object identifi-cation circuit of Wang et al. (2022). A common methodology is differentiable masking through a Gumbel-softmax relaxation, which attaches a learnable gate to each component in order to discover the minimal set of components that explains a target behavior. Most prior applications aim to explain a correct prediction. We instead apply attention-head masking as a suppressive intervention, searching for a minimal set of heads whose removal eliminates an unwanted behavior, namely sentence-level contextual entrainment, and we ask whether the heads found in this way are general across relations. 

7 Conclusion 

We extended token-level contextual entrainment to sentence-level and studied it on an objective task (LRE) and a subjective task (WVS). Exten-sive experiments show that the model increases the probability that the context in the prompt, includ-ing counterfactual context, appears in its continu-ation. When the context is an opinion statement, the model increases the probability of generating opinion statements of both the same and opposite polarity in its continuation. Contextual entrain-ment varies predictably with model size: it de-creases as the model size increases, whereas the probability assigned to query-relevant response candidates increases. Contextual entrainment is controlled by a small set of shared heads. Mask-ing these heads mitigates contextual entrainment by about half while leaving model performance essentially unchanged, which makes the shared heads a concrete and minimal intervention point for mitigating the phenomenon. References 

Yoshua Bengio, Nicholas Léonard, and Aaron Courville. 2013. Estimating or propagat-ing gradients through stochastic neurons for conditional computation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.3432 .Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Gre-gory Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien, Eric Hallahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shiv-anshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, et al. 2023. Pythia: A suite for analyzing large language models across training and scal-ing. In International conference on machine learning , pages 2397–2430. PMLR. Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. Ad-vances in neural information processing sys-tems , 33:1877–1901. Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. 2021. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 .Joy Crosbie and Ekaterina Shutova. 2025. Induc-tion heads as an essential mechanism for pattern matching in in-context learning. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025 , pages 5034–5096. Florin Cuconasu, Giovanni Trappolini, Federico Siciliano, Simone Filice, Cesare Campagnano, Yoelle Maarek, Nicola Tonellotto, and Fabrizio Silvestri. 2024. The power of noise: Redefining retrieval for rag systems. In Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Re-trieval , pages 719–729. Damai Dai, Yutao Sun, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Shum-ing Ma, Zhifang Sui, and Furu Wei. 2023. Why can gpt learn in-context? language mod-els secretly perform gradient descent as meta-optimizers. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pages 4005–4019. Nicola De Cao, Michael Schlichtkrull, Wilker Aziz, and Ivan Titov. 2020. How do decisions emerge across layers in neural models? inter-pretation with differentiable masking. In Pro-ceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empiri-cal Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 3243–3255. Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 con-ference of the North American chapter of the association for computational linguistics: hu-man language technologies, volume 1 (long and short papers) , pages 4171–4186. Nolan Dey, Gurpreet Gosal, Hemant Khachane, William Marshall, Ribhu Pathria, Marvin Tom, Joel Hestness, et al. 2023. Cerebras-gpt: Open compute-optimal language models trained on the cerebras wafer-scale cluster. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03208 .Charles Dugas, Yoshua Bengio, François Bélisle, Claude Nadeau, and René Garcia. 2000. Incor-porating second-order functional knowledge for better option pricing. Advances in neural infor-mation processing systems , 13. Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, et al. 2021. A mathematical frame-work for transformer circuits. Transformer Cir-cuits Thread , 1(1):12. Leo Gao, John Schulman, and Jacob Hilton. 2023. Scaling laws for reward model overoptimiza-tion. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 10835–10866. PMLR. Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhi-nav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Ka-dian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, An-thony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark, Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Roziere, Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris Marra, Chris Mc-Connell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong, Cristian Can-ton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny Livshits, Danny Wyatt, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino, Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Di-nan, Eric Michael Smith, Filip Radenovic, Francisco Guzmán, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Syn-naeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Ander-son, Govind Thattai, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hai-ley Nguyen, Hannah Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jack Zhang, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Gef-fert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Mahadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Bil-lock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy Fu, Jian-feng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak, Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Alwala, Karthik Prasad, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plaw-iak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini, Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Kushal Lakhotia, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo, Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Man-nat Singh, Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova, Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal, Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chat-terji, Ning Zhang, Olivier Duchenne, Onur Çelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhargava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan, Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingx-iao Dong, Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapa-thy, Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic, Roberta Raileanu, Rohan Ma-heswari, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sumbaly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa, San-jay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang, Sharath Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Van-denhende, Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Guru-rangan, Sydney Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Geor-giou, Thomas Scialom, Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta, Vignesh Ra-manathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vítor Albiero, Vladan Petrovic, Weiwei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang, Xiaofang Wang, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xide Xia, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur, Yas-mine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aayushi Srivas-tava, Abha Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajn-feld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein, Amanda Kallet, Amit Sangani, Amos Teo, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Alvarado, Andrew Caples, Andrew Gu, Andrew Ho, An-drew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit Ramchan-dani, Annie Dong, Annie Franco, Anuj Goyal, Aparajita Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ash-ley Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisen-man, Azadeh Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Mau-rer, Benjamin Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Brandon Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina Mejia, Ce Liu, Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai, Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Cynthia Gao, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana Liskovich, Di-dem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le, Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil, Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily Hahn, Emily Wood, Eric-Tuan Le, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Arcaute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smoth-ers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Filippos Kokkinos, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco Caggioni, Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Geor-gia Swee, Gil Halpern, Grant Herman, Grig-ory Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshmi-narayanan, Hakan Inan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang, Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Goldman, Hongyuan Zhan, Ibrahim Damlaj, Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Ilias Leontiadis, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman, James Geboski, James Kohli, Janice Lam, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jes-sica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe Cum-mings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan Mc-Phie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Jun-jie Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Sax-ena, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kiran Jagadeesh, Kun Huang, Kunal Chawla, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva, Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrst-edt, Madian Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Man-ish Bhatt, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson, Matthew Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim Gro-shev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Keneally, Miao Liu, Michael L. Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vy-atskov, Mikayel Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mohammad Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navyata Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikhil Mehta, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong, Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli, Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux, Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pri-tish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao, Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Rangaprabhu Parthasarathy, Raymond Li, Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott, Sachin Mehta, Sachin Siby, Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Satadru Pan, Saurabh Mahajan, Saurabh Verma, Seiji Ya-mamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lind-say, Shaun Lindsay, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha, Shishir Patil, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield, Sudar-shan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Summer Deng, Sungmin Cho, Sunny Virk, Suraj Sub-ramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser, Tamara Best, Thilo Koehler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Timothy Chou, Tzook Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Vic-toria Montanez, Vijai Mohan, Vinay Satish Kumar, Vishal Mangla, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will Constable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xilun Wu, Xinbo Gao, Yaniv Kleinman, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi, Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yu Zhao, Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yunlu Li, Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary DeVito, Zef Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, Zhi-wei Zhao, and Zhiyu Ma. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. Christian Haerpfer, Ronald Inglehart, Alejandro Moreno, Christian Welzel, Kseniya Kizilova, Juan Diez-Medrano, Marta Lagos, Pippa Nor-ris, Eduard Ponarin, and Bi Puranen. 2022. World values survey: Round seven – country-pooled datafile version 6.0. Dataset. Evan Hernandez, Arnab Sen Sharma, Tal Hak-lay, Kevin Meng, Martin Wattenberg, Jacob Andreas, Yonatan Belinkov, and David Bau. 2024. Linearity of relation decoding in trans-former language models. In International Con-ference on Learning Representations , volume 2024, pages 10504–10526. Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. 2017. Categorical reparametrization with gumble-softmax. In International Conference on Learn-ing Representations (ICLR 2017) . OpenReview. net. Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chap-lot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, Lélio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. 2023. Mistral 7b. Dikshant Kukreja, Kshitij Sah, Gautam Gupta, Avinash Anand, Rajiv Ratn Shah, Zhengkui Wang, Aik Beng Ng, and Erik Cambria. 2026. Better and worse with scale: How contextual entrainment diverges with model size. Solomon Kullback and Richard A Leibler. 1951. On information and sufficiency. The annals of mathematical statistics , 22(1):79–86. Tatsuki Kuribayashi, Yohei Oseki, and Timothy Baldwin. 2024. Psychometric predictive power of large language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2024 , pages 1983–2005. Tianle Li, Xueguang Ma, Alex Zhuang, Yu Gu, Yu Su, and Wenhu Chen. 2023. Few-shot in-context learning on knowledge base question answering. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 6966–6980, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yang Liu. 2024. Robust evaluation measures for evaluating social biases in masked language models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Con-ference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 38, pages 18707–18715. Yang Liu and Chenhui Chu. 2025. Do LLMs align human values regarding social biases? judg-ing and explaining social biases with LLMs. In Findings of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 21591– 21628, Suzhou, China. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. Yang Liu and Yuexian Hou. 2023. Mining ef-fective features using quantum entropy for hu-mor recognition. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EACL 2023 ,pages 2048–2053, Dubrovnik, Croatia. Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics. Yang Liu, Masahiro Kaneko, and Chenhui Chu. 2026. On the alignment of large language mod-els with global human opinion. In Proceed-ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intel-ligence , volume 40, pages 37673–37681. Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. 2017. De-coupled weight decay regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101 .Sewon Min, Xinxi Lyu, Ari Holtzman, Mikel Artetxe, Mike Lewis, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2022. Rethinking the role of demonstrations: What makes in-context learn-ing work? In Proceedings of the 2022 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 11048–11064, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jingcheng Niu, Xingdi Yuan, Tong Wang, Hamidreza Saghir, and Amir H. Abdi. 2025. Llama see, llama do: A mechanistic perspec-tive on contextual entrainment and distraction in LLMs. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 16218–16239, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom Henighan, Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Scott Johnston, Andy Jones, Jack-son Kernion, Liane Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and Chris Olah. 2022. In-context learning and induction heads. Qwen, :, An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming Lu, Keqin Bao, Kexin Yang, Le Yu, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Pei Zhang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Runji Lin, Tianhao Li, Tianyi Tang, Tingyu Xia, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, and Zihan Qiu. 2025. Qwen2.5 technical report. Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Sali-mans, Ilya Sutskever, et al. 2018. Improv-ing language understanding by generative pre-training. Freda Shi, Xinyun Chen, Kanishka Misra, Nathan Scales, David Dohan, Ed H Chi, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny Zhou. 2023. Large lan-guage models can be easily distracted by ir-relevant context. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 31210–31227. PMLR. Gemma Team, Aishwarya Kamath, Johan Fer-ret, Shreya Pathak, Nino Vieillard, Ramona Merhej, Sarah Perrin, Tatiana Matejovicova, Alexandre Ramé, Morgane Rivière, Louis Rouillard, Thomas Mesnard, Geoffrey Cideron, Jean bastien Grill, Sabela Ramos, Edouard Yvinec, Michelle Casbon, Etienne Pot, Ivo Penchev, Gaël Liu, Francesco Visin, Kath-leen Kenealy, Lucas Beyer, Xiaohai Zhai, Anton Tsitsulin, Robert Busa-Fekete, Alex Feng, Noveen Sachdeva, Benjamin Coleman, Yi Gao, Basil Mustafa, Iain Barr, Emilio Parisotto, David Tian, Matan Eyal, Colin Cherry, Jan-Thorsten Peter, Danila Sinopal-nikov, Surya Bhupatiraju, Rishabh Agarwal, Mehran Kazemi, Dan Malkin, Ravin Ku-mar, David Vilar, Idan Brusilovsky, Jiaming Luo, Andreas Steiner, Abe Friesen, Abhan-shu Sharma, Abheesht Sharma, Adi Mayrav Gilady, Adrian Goedeckemeyer, Alaa Saade, Alex Feng, Alexander Kolesnikov, Alexei Ben-debury, Alvin Abdagic, Amit Vadi, András György, André Susano Pinto, Anil Das, Ankur Bapna, Antoine Miech, Antoine Yang, Anto-nia Paterson, Ashish Shenoy, Ayan Chakrabarti, Bilal Piot, Bo Wu, Bobak Shahriari, Bryce Petrini, Charlie Chen, Charline Le Lan, Christo-pher A. Choquette-Choo, CJ Carey, Cor-mac Brick, Daniel Deutsch, Danielle Eisen-bud, Dee Cattle, Derek Cheng, Dimitris Pa-paras, Divyashree Shivakumar Sreepathihalli, Doug Reid, Dustin Tran, Dustin Zelle, Eric Noland, Erwin Huizenga, Eugene Kharitonov, Frederick Liu, Gagik Amirkhanyan, Glenn Cameron, Hadi Hashemi, Hanna Klimczak-Pluci´ nska, Harman Singh, Harsh Mehta, Har-shal Tushar Lehri, Hussein Hazimeh, Ian Bal-lantyne, Idan Szpektor, Ivan Nardini, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Jetha Chan, Joe Stanton, John Wieting, Jonathan Lai, Jordi Orbay, Joseph Fer-nandez, Josh Newlan, Ju yeong Ji, Jyotinder Singh, Kat Black, Kathy Yu, Kevin Hui, Ki-ran Vodrahalli, Klaus Greff, Linhai Qiu, Mar-cella Valentine, Marina Coelho, Marvin Rit-ter, Matt Hoffman, Matthew Watson, Mayank Chaturvedi, Michael Moynihan, Min Ma, Nabila Babar, Natasha Noy, Nathan Byrd, Nick Roy, Nikola Momchev, Nilay Chauhan, Noveen Sachdeva, Oskar Bunyan, Pankil Botarda, Paul Caron, Paul Kishan Rubenstein, Phil Culliton, Philipp Schmid, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Ping-mei Xu, Piotr Stanczyk, Pouya Tafti, Rakesh Shivanna, Renjie Wu, Renke Pan, Reza Rokni, Rob Willoughby, Rohith Vallu, Ryan Mullins, Sammy Jerome, Sara Smoot, Sertan Girgin, Shariq Iqbal, Shashir Reddy, Shruti Sheth, Siim Põder, Sijal Bhatnagar, Sindhu Raghuram Pa-nyam, Sivan Eiger, Susan Zhang, Tianqi Liu, Trevor Yacovone, Tyler Liechty, Uday Kalra, Utku Evci, Vedant Misra, Vincent Roseberry, Vlad Feinberg, Vlad Kolesnikov, Woohyun Han, Woosuk Kwon, Xi Chen, Yinlam Chow, Yuvein Zhu, Zichuan Wei, Zoltan Egyed, Victor Cotruta, Minh Giang, Phoebe Kirk, Anand Rao, Kat Black, Nabila Babar, Jessica Lo, Erica Mor-eira, Luiz Gustavo Martins, Omar Sanseviero, Lucas Gonzalez, Zach Gleicher, Tris Warkentin, Vahab Mirrokni, Evan Senter, Eli Collins, Joelle Barral, Zoubin Ghahramani, Raia Had-sell, Yossi Matias, D. Sculley, Slav Petrov, Noah Fiedel, Noam Shazeer, Oriol Vinyals, Jeff Dean, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Clement Farabet, Elena Buchatskaya, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Rohan Anil, Dmitry, Lep-ikhin, Sebastian Borgeaud, Olivier Bachem, Ar-mand Joulin, Alek Andreev, Cassidy Hardin, Robert Dadashi, and Léonard Hussenot. 2025. Gemma 3 technical report. Gemma Team, Morgane Riviere, Shreya Pathak, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Cassidy Hardin, Surya Bhupatiraju, Léonard Hussenot, Thomas Mes-nard, Bobak Shahriari, Alexandre Ramé, et al. 2024. Gemma 2: Improving open language models at a practical size. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00118 .Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Pe-ter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernan-des, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cyn-thia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee, Di-ana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra, Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Sal-adi, Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Llama 2: Open foun-dation and fine-tuned chat models. Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. At-tention is all you need. Advances in neural in-formation processing systems , 30. Kevin Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2022. Interpretability in the wild: a circuit for indirect object identification in gpt-2 small. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.00593 .Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information pro-cessing systems , 35:24824–24837. An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chu-jie Zheng, Dayiheng Liu, Fan Zhou, Fei Huang, Feng Hu, Hao Ge, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jia-long Tang, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jing Zhou, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keqin Bao, Kexin Yang, Le Yu, Lianghao Deng, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Mingze Li, Pei Zhang, Peng Wang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Ruize Gao, Shix-uan Liu, Shuang Luo, Tianhao Li, Tianyi Tang, Wenbiao Yin, Xingzhang Ren, Xinyu Wang, Xinyu Zhang, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang, Yinger Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zekun Wang, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, Zhipeng Zhou, and Zihan Qiu. 2025. Qwen3 technical report. Ori Yoran, Tomer Wolfson, Ori Ram, and Jonathan Berant. 2023. Making retrieval-augmented language models robust to irrelevant context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01558 .Zihao Zhao, Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Dan Klein, and Sameer Singh. 2021. Calibrate before use: Improving few-shot performance of language models. In International conference on ma-chine learning , pages 12697–12706. Pmlr.