Title: As Easy as Rocket Science: Assessing the Ability of Large Language Models to Interpret Negation in Figurative Language

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.18922v1

Published Time: Thu, 18 Jun 2026 00:53:43 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# As Easy as Rocket Science: Assessing the Ability of Large Language Models to Interpret Negation in Figurative Language 

## Jasmine Owers ∗

## Intelligent Systems Lab University of Bristol UK 

## Edwin Simpson 

## Intelligent Systems Lab University of Bristol UK 

## Martha Lewis ∗

## ILLC University of Amsterdam The Netherlands 

## Abstract 

Figurative language and negation are two ar-eas that challenge current language models, however, both are widely used throughout written and spoken language. Large lan-guage models (LLMs) are also widely used in everyday contexts where they cannot nec-essarily be tuned for a specific dataset. It is therefore essential to understand the abil-ity of LLMs to correctly interpret text that includes both negation and figurative lan-guage. To investigate this, we develop a set of new annotations to an existing dataset of figurative language, and test a range of lan-guage models on the dataset. We find that the combination of negation and figurative-ness can present a particular challenge, and that performance overall and across differ-ent negation types is particularly dependent on the prompt style used. 

## 1 Introduction 

Figurative language is prevalent throughout every-day language use (Veale et al., 2016; Roberts and Kreuz, 1994). Metaphor, in particular, has been argued to form a fundamental foundation to our cognitive and creative abilities (Lakoff and John-son, 1980). As such, language models need to be able to appropriately respond to uses of figurative language in multiple downstream contexts such as text summarization, natural language understand-ing (NLU), and natural language inference (NLI). Furthermore, models should be able to do this out-of-the-box, without involving specific finetuning. Previous research has shown that figurative lan-guage can cause difficulty for language models, particularly in the area of NLI (Agerri, 2008; Chakrabarty et al., 2021). On the other hand, pos-itive performance for language models in this do-main is seen in Stowe et al. (2022); Liu et al.  

> ∗Corresponding authors: JO (jo16726@bristol.ac.uk) or ML (m.a.f.lewis@uva.nl)

(2022). In these cases, the models are tested on mostly conventional metaphor (Stowe et al., 2022), or good performance is attained via fine-tuning (Liu et al., 2022). Much work on figurative language and NLI has concentrated on metaphor; one exception is Stowe et al. (2022) who also ex-amine the effect of sarcasm, although only in con-tradictory contexts. Negation is also a known challenge for models to interpret, especially without specific finetuning (Hossain et al., 2020), and research into perfor-mance on text combining both negation and fig-urative language is limited. There is thus a gap in understanding the ability of modern language models to correctly interpret novel figurative lan-guage in contexts involving negation. To address this gap, we provide a set of novel annotations for the Fig-QA dataset (Liu et al., 2022), and assess the ability of a range of language models to in-terpret novel figurative language in combination with negation. We analyse the embedding space of one model to discover other linguistic features that may contribute to performance in metaphor interpretation, and find that tense and concreteness also play a role, although somewhat outweighed by the effect of negation. To understand the effect of negation in the absence of figurative language, we develop a small literal paraphrasing dataset, finding that models tend to perform better in the literal setting. We therefore find that the combina-tion of negation and figurative language is partic-ularly challenging for a range of language models. This paper makes the following contributions: • We provide annotations for metaphor/simile, negation, tense and concreteness to Fig-QA (Liu et al., 2022), an existing dataset of less conventional figurative language. • We create a new small-scale dataset of literal negation based on the Fig-QA dataset, de-signed to isolate the effects of figurative lan-

> arXiv:2606.18922v1 [cs.CL] 17 Jun 2026

guage and negation. • We test a wide range of models, includ-ing recent LLMs, on these datasets and give an analysis of the embedding space of one model on this task. • We find that the combination of negation and figurativeness presents a particular challenge, and that models’ performance is sensitive to the type of prompt used. Code and data are available at 

https://github.com/jrdowers/ Negation-and-Fig-Lang .

## 2 Background and Related Work 

2.1 Types of Figurative Language 

In this paper, we consider metaphor and simile, as well as irony, in the form of simile combined with negation. Both metaphor and simile provide an explanation of one concept in terms of another. In the case of metaphor, the concept to be explained (the target) is more complex or abstract, and is ex-plained in terms of a simpler or more concrete con-cept (the source). For example, in the fire devoured the home , the properties of the source domain (lit-eral meaning of devour) are applied to the tar-get domain (destruction) to enhance the meaning (Lakoff and Johnson, 1980). In the case of simile, an explicit comparison–often with exaggeration– is given using words such as “like” or “as”. In the box was as light as a feather the box is described in terms of the lightweight property of a feather. Both metaphor and simile are prevalent in nat-ural language (for metaphor, see statistics calcu-lated in Shutova (2010); Steen et al. (2010)), and metaphor is argued to be driven by an underly-ing cognitive process by which abstract or unfa-miliar concepts are understood by imagining them as more concrete concepts (Lakoff and Johnson, 1980). Research in the field of human psychol-ogy and cognitive science shows that, overall, peo-ple are able to understand metaphor as easily as literal sentences (Cacciari and Glucksberg, 1994), and we therefore argue that if language models are to behave in a human-like way, they should also be able to understand metaphor easily. 

2.2 Figurative Language Interpretation 

One approach to assessing figurative language interpretation is by assessing the ability of a model to correctly paraphrase a sentence that uses metaphor (Shutova, 2010). This approach is taken in Bizzoni and Lappin (2018); Tong et al. (2024); Liu et al. (2022), where metaphorical sentences are paired with two or more paraphrases, one of which is apt, and the task of the model is to pick out the apt paraphrase. In general, models do not perform at human level at this task, although Liu et al. (2022) find that with fine-tuning the perfor-mance of RoBERTa improves considerably. Figurative language interpretation has also been assessed via a natural language inference task (Chakrabarty et al., 2021; Stowe et al., 2022). Re-lated tasks include asking models to generate ex-planations (Chakrabarty et al., 2022b) or classify-ing text continuations (Chakrabarty et al., 2022a). Fine-tuning again helped performance, as did en-hancing models with a knowledge-base compo-nent in Chakrabarty et al. (2022a). Recent work has shown that newer models are improving at metaphor interpretation and in par-ticular novel metaphor. Ichien et al. (2024) show that GPT-4 achieves close to human performance on Fig-QA and is also able to generate impressive interpretations of novel metaphors. The prompt used for testing GPT-4 gave the figurative sentence and a choice of two literal sentences. In this paper, we probe this further by analysing performance at a more fine-grained level. 

2.3 Negation 

In natural language, between 9% and 30% of sentences contain negation depending on domain (Hossain et al., 2020). As negation is so preva-lent, it is crucial for language models to be able to accurately interpret it. However, negation is also known to present a particular challenge to mod-els in NLU. Hossain et al. (2020); Kassner and Schütze (2020); García-Ferrero et al. (2023), show that models have trouble interpreting negation, with some improvement after finetuning (Hossain et al., 2020; Hosseini et al., 2021). Models can rely on surface patterns when reasoning about sen-tences including negation; García-Ferrero et al. (2023) show that in a True/False classification task, models are more likely to label sentences in-cluding negation as False. Further, the pretrain-ing of the model can affect this; Truong et al. (2023) found that instruction-tuned models per-form better with negation, particularly where they are prompted to reason about negation. Figurative Interpretation metaphor pair This job is a field of flowers. The job is easy and nice. This job is a hammer to the knees. The job is brutal and difficult.                 

> non-neg pair The classroom was like a freezer. The classroom was really cold. The classroom was like an oven. The classroom was really hot.
> not pair intens This is as fun as a bowl of nachos. It’s very fun. neg This is as fun as stubbing your toe. It’s not fun at all.
> antonym pair intens She’s as gentle as a puppy. She’s very gentle. neg She’s as gentle as a shark. She’s vicious.
> Table 1

: Examples of different types of metaphor and simile instances in Fig-QA 

2.4 Combining Figurative Language and Negation 

All of the above points to the idea that language models may have difficulty in combining figura-tive language and negation. Indeed, this has been briefly noted in Liu et al. (2022), and negated sen-tences are included in Stowe et al. (2022). In this paper, we further investigate the interaction of fig-urative language and negation. We examine the effect of negation on the accuracy of metaphor in-terpretation in a paraphrasing task, look at the im-pact of different prompting styles, and compare a range of models. Experiments do not include fine-tuning – we argue that in particular large pre-trained LLMs should be able to handle the ex-tremely prevalent phenomena of negation and fig-urative language out-of-the-box. 

## 3 Negation Dataset 

To understand the effect of metaphor, simile, and negation in NLU, we develop a set of annotations for the Fig-QA dataset, originally created to sup-port interpretation of figurative language. This dataset consists of 10,256 instances of figurative sentences with literal interpretations, generated by crowdworkers who were instructed to generate pairs of rare or creative, but easily interpretable metaphors with opposite meanings, along with lit-eral paraphrases. Each figurative sentence has one correct and one incorrect paraphrase. Most figura-tive sentences in the dataset are similes, and most metaphorical sentences are copula metaphors 1.The full dataset of 10,256 sentences was split by the original authors into a training set of 9,110 sen-tences and a test set of 1,146 sentences. We create an approximate classification of the instances into metaphors ( met ) (e.g. “When he hid, he became a mouse”) and similes ( sim ) by classi-fying similes as containing “as” (e.g. “The display    

> 1metaphors of the form Xis a Y, e.g. ‘The girl is a mouse’.

was bright as the sun”), “like” (e.g. “The joke is like a ton of concrete”) or “the * of”, (e.g. “The runner had the speed of a fired bullet ”). Within the simile category, the paraphrases gen-erally take the form “NOUN is very ADJ”, where the simile is an intensification of the adjective, or “NOUN is not ADJ at all”, where the simile negates the adjective. We therefore categorise the simile instances into separate cases where the sim-ile acts either as an intensification ( intens ) or a negation ( neg ). Similes generally come in pairs, where exactly one is classed as neg and the other as intens . We call these pairs neg pairs , and the re-maining non-paired similes we call non-neg pairs .Within the category of negated similes, we de-fine two types of negating similes: not , containing either “not”, “n’t” or “no” in exactly one of the two interpretations, and antonym , containing the structure “as * as” in the simile, and the adjective, “*”, appearing in exactly one of the two interpre-tations. If the “as * as” structure contains a multi-word phrase, the first word is used, e.g. “easy” in “as easy to read as”, see examples in Table 1. Table 2 shows the number of instances in each category. Labels are provided for the 9,110 sen-tences included in the Fig-QA training set; each of these sentences has been paired with two possi-ble paraphrases, and a label is available for which paraphrase is correct. We use this larger set of an-notated sentences in most of our analyses. The total of neg pairs and non-neg pairs is 7064; there are 106 simile instances not included in these: 90 similes whose partner is a metaphor, 7 simile pairs (14 instances) with inconsistent formats and two unpaired sentences. There are 4 more intens in-stances than neg instances; these are two pairs in which the adjective is different in each sentence: “The cake was as hard as a rock.” but “The cake was as light as a feather”, and “The book had a plot that many would find as Boring as watching paint dry” but “The book had a plot that many would Data split Count all 9110 met 1940 sim 7170 non-neg pairs 3762 neg pairs 3302 neg 1649 neg “not” 1029 neg “antonym” 620 intens 1653 intens “not” 1029 intens “antonym” 624 

> Table 2

: Number of sentences in each split of the Fig-QA train set find as Exciting as a three-ring circus”. Thus, both sentences in the pair are intensifications. These are also the two extra pairs in intens “antonym” .We manually validated the annotations of 184 sentences from the train set (2% of the dataset) randomly selected proportionally to each cate-gory. We found that 7 of the sentences in the sample were incorrectly annotated: 3 metaphors were classified as similes (non-neg pairs), 2 simi-les (non-neg pairs) were classified as metaphors, 1 simile was incorrectly classified as a neg pair and 1 sentence was broken in the original dataset. Since our key analyses involve similes that are in the neg pairs subset of the dataset, these misclassifications have minimal impact. 

## 4 Methods 

The task of Fig-QA is as follows: given a triple of sentences ( fig , lit 1, lit 2), a model must select the most appropriate paraphrase out of lit 1 and lit 2.One of lit 1 and lit 2 is a literal paraphrase of fig ,and the other contradicts it (recall Table 1 for ex-amples). We test a range of different models in-cluding embedding-based models and open- and closed-source LLMs. The range of models neces-sitates a range of different assessment methods. For embedding models, we compare the cosine similarity of the embeddings of the figurative sen-tence and each paraphrase. However, autoregres-sive models such as Llama do not have a natural sentence embedding output as they are trained to output probabilities over sequences. We therefore use the following two methods for autoregressive models: we use LLM logprobs, where available, to determine the likelihood of each paraphrase to fol-low the figurative sentence; and we prompt models with the figurative sentence and both paraphrases and ask which is most appropriate. Where pos-sible we test each autoregressive model on both methods. 

4.1 Models 

We test a series of models ranging from simple to state of the art: GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014), SBERT (all-mpnet-base-v2 accessed via Hugging Face) (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019), Llama-3, -3.1 and -3.3 (Llama Team, 2024), GPT-4o-mini, GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024a) and OpenAI o1-mini (OpenAI, 2024b). 2 Llama models were accessed via the Together AI API 3 and GPT models were accessed via the OpenAI API 4.All Llama 3 models were quantised to FP8 as these were the versions of the models provided by Together AI. GloVe was tested on a lemmatised version of the sentences since the GloVe embed-dings we used did not have every unlemmatised word in the vocabulary. The auto-regressive LLMs were tested using the full unlemmatised sentences from the dataset. We also tested Llama-2 (Touvron et al., 2023), quantised to FP4, and GPT-Neo (Black et al., 2021), accessed via Hugging Face and run on a lo-cal server. These results can be found in Appendix C. 

4.2 Scoring Methods Embedding . To test the performance of GloVe and SBERT, we use cosine similarity of embed-dings. A sentence embedding is generated for each sentence in the triple ( fig , lit 1, lit 2). In the case of GloVe, this is achieved by element-wise addi-tion of the word embeddings. The cosine simi-larity is calculated between the vector for fig and the vectors for each of lit 1 and lit 2. The model then selects the paraphrase with the highest sim-ilarity. Each figurative sentence is classified as paraphrased correctly or incorrectly. Two methods are used for the auto-regressive models: a Mid-Phrase method and a Question-Answer method. The Mid-Phrase method com-pares a normalised log-likelihood of two candi-date phrases. First, the input phrases are prepared.   

> 2We also ran tests on Word2Vec (Mikolov et al., 2013), ms-Word2DM-d10 (Meyer and Lewis, 2020), Infersent (Con-neau et al., 2017), and SBERT all-MiniLM-L6-v2; results for these models are available at https://github.com/ jrdowers/Negation-and-Fig-Lang
> 3https://api.together.ai/
> 4https://platform.openai.com/ (a) Embedding and Mid-Phrase (b) Question-Answer Figure 1

: Accuracy of models on Fig-QA train set using (a) the embedding and mid-phrase methods and (b) the question-answer method. The bars indicate 95% binomial confidence intervals except Llama models in (a) which are 95% bootstrap confidence intervals. The dotted line is the random baseline. These are the figurative sentence, followed by a mid-phrase such as “In other words,”, followed by one of the candidate paraphrases, for exam-ple “ She’s as gentle as a puppy. In other words, She’s very gentle. ” . When adding the mid-phrase, we standardise the punctuation at the end of the figurative sentence and the capitalisation of the paraphrase. We then calculate a length-normalised phrase log-likelihood L. This is calculated as the mean of the token log-likelihoods in the phrase, or equivalently the negative log of the per-token per-plexity as defined in Jurafsky and Martin (2025). 

L = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

ln P (wi | w1, w 2, . . . , w i−1) (1) Each figurative sentence is classified as correctly paraphrased if L for the apt paraphrase is higher than for the inapt, and incorrect otherwise. We test 5 mid-phrases: “That is to say, ”, “In other words, ”, “Put differently, ”, a space and a newline. In the Question-Answer method, the model is prompted with the figurative sentence and both paraphrases, and asked which is the best para-phrase. The prompt format is as follows: ‘Which of the following sentences, sentence A or sentence B, most accurately describes the meaning of the following: “Her word had the strength of titanium.”? Sentence A: “Her promises can be believed.” Sentence B: “Her promises can-not be trusted.”\n\nAnswer: Sentence ’ For GPT models, the next generated token is used (‘A’ or ‘B’). To account for model bias to-wards choosing the first answer presented, for ev-ery other pair of figurative sentences the order of the paraphrases in the prompt was reversed. For Llama models the output was inconsis-tent, generating varied chatty responses. Further-more, the model almost always picked the first paraphrase, sentence A. We therefore use a log-likelihood based method for the Llama models. We use equation (1) to calculate the log-likelihood of the phrase with each of the answers ‘A’ or ‘B’, appended to the end of the prompt and select the answer with the highest log-likelihood. This method is equivalent to determining which output is more likely, ‘A’ or ‘B’. We include human performance on the test split of the dataset, provided by Liu et al. (2022). Anno-tators saw both paraphrases and chose the most ap-propriate; this is equivalent to our question-answer method. Since human performance is only avail-able on the test set, we also tested some models on the test set for a direct comparison (results are shown in Appendix B). There is a 0.2% difference between our calculated overall accuracy of human annotators and that reported in Liu et al. (2022). For all methods, the task is a binary classifica-tion, we measure performance using accuracy, and the random baseline is 0.5. To test statistical sig-nificance we use McNemar’s test where the data can be paired and a one-sided two-proportion z-test otherwise, with Benjamini-Hochberg correc-tion for multiple comparisons. 

## 5 Negation Results 

We test models on each of the 5 mid-phrases. The mean of the accuracy using the connector mid-phrases (“That is to say, ”, “In other words, ”, “Put differently, ”), and the connector-free mid-phrases (a space and a newline) for the Fig-QA train set are shown in Table 3. The connector-free mid-phrases consistently result in significantly lower accuracy (p << 0.01 ). This is also consistent in each split of the dataset considered below, so we only re-port the average of connector mid-phrases for the rest of the paper. Results for each individual mid-phrase can be found in Appendix A. As a first analysis, we calculate the perfor-mance of models overall and split by metaphor and simile (Figure 1). Across every model, on the train set, performance on metaphorical sen-tences was greater than or equal to performance on sentences involving similes. Human perfor-mance on the test set was equal across sentence types (all: 0.946, 95% binomial confidence inter-val [0.931-0.958], met: 0.943 [0.907-0.966], sim: 0.946 [0.930-0.960]). Models using the question-answer method were close to human performance on the test set, Llama3.1-405B and GPT-4o show-ing no significant difference from human perfor-mance (Figure 10, Appendix B). Furthermore, per-formance for a given model using the question-answer prompt style (Figure 1b) was stronger than performance when using the mid-phrase method (Figure 1a). 

5.1 Negating vs Intensifying Similes 

We conjecture that models perform more weakly on simile due to the presence of negation, as nega-tion is more common in similes than metaphors in the dataset: 29% of similes in the train set are neg pairs with explicit negation in the para-phrase but only 12% of metaphors are, and many similes with as-as structure have implicit negation with antonym type pairs which do not exist for metaphors. In Figure 2 we show accuracy split by negating and intensifying similes. For the embed-ding and mid-phrase prompt style (Figure 2a), we see that while older models (GloVe, SBERT) have the expected pattern that performance is signifi-cantly weaker on negated sentences ( p < 0.05 ), Llama models have the opposite pattern. For the question-answer prompt style, Figure 2b shows that while accuracy is generally higher, we do see the expected pattern that negated sen-tences are more difficult for models to interpret. Accuracy for intensifying similes is similarly high across all models but for negating similes is much more varied and mostly lower. This effect is common to different model sizes and architec-tures: on the train set, all models prompted with the question-answer prompt style have a signifi-cantly lower performance on negating similes than intensifying ( p < 0.05 ) with the exception of Llama-3.1-405B-Instruct. On the test set, we see a very similar pattern of results, although the differ-ence is significant only for GPT-4o-mini (Figure 11, Appendix B). Note that the test set is around one eighth the size of the train set, which con-tributes to the lack of statistical significance. Hu-mans showed no significant difference in accuracy between negating and intensifying similes (neg: 0.934, 95% binomial confidence interval [0.883-0.965], intens: 0.940 [0.894-0.968]). 

5.2 Explicit vs Implicit Negation 

In Figure 3, we show a breakdown into the not and 

antonym categories introduced in Table 1 and ag-gregated across prompting style. For the embedding and mid-phrase methods, Figure 3 shows that the stronger performance of models on negated sentences is not split equally across different negation types. Instead, most models perform more strongly on sentences using explicit negation ( not ) and less strongly on sen-tences involving antonyms ( antonym ). For the question-answer prompt style, Figure 3 shows that on the train set, performance in neg 

and intens sentences is similar across the not and 

antonym categories, and fits the expected pattern that intens sentences are easier to paraphrase than 

neg sentences. This is in contrast to performance using the mid-phrase and embedding methods, with the exception of SBERT. On the test set, we see a somewhat similar pattern to the train set, al-though the differences in accuracy between neg not and neg antonym , and neg not and intens not 

are not significant. Humans, however, showed no statistically significant difference in accuracy be-tween the different negation types. 

## 6 Embedding Analysis 

Multiple factors are likely to contribute to perfor-mance on figurative language interpretation. To Llama-3-70B-Instruct Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct Llama-3.1-405B-Instruct Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct connector 0.7043 [0.6989-0.7097] 0.7060 [0.7005-0.7114] 0.7407 [0.7355-0.7459] 0.7058 [0.7004-0.7112] connector-free 0.6529 [0.6459-0.6597] 0.6513 [0.6443-0.6582] 0.6685 [0.6616-0.6753] 0.6461 [0.6392-0.6531] 

Table 3 : Overall accuracy on Fig-QA using the mid-phrase method showing average across connector and connector-free mid-phrases, with 95% bootstrap confidence intervals 

(a) Embedding and Mid-Phrase (b) Question-Answer Figure 2 : Accuracy of models on negating and intensifying similes in the Fig-QA train set using (a) the embedding and mid-phrase methods and (b) the question-answer method. The bars indicate 95% binomial confidence intervals except Llama models in (a) which are 95% bootstrap confidence intervals. The dotted line is the random baseline. Note that some models achieve a higher accuracy with negating similes than intensifying. 

Figure 3 : Accuracy on negating and intensifying similes in Fig-QA. Mid-Phrase shows the mean of all Llama3 models; Question-Answer shows the mean of all models using the question-answer method. Bars indicate 95% bootstrap confidence intervals where an average over models is taken and 95% binomial confidence intervals otherwise. The dotted line is the random baseline. isolate these we examine the embedding space of SBERT 5. We perform Principal Component Anal-ysis (PCA) on the sentence embeddings for the lit-eral paraphrases. Plots of the first four principal components (PCs) are shown in Figure 4. PC3 shows a strong separation of negated sentences from non-negated sentences, and there are other clusters which may contribute to performance. We manually examine sentences from different regions of the first six PCs and observe the follow-ing patterns, summarised in Table 4.         

> PC SBERT 0past/present tense 1presence of feminine pronoun or noun 2semantically good/bad 3negated/not negated 4concrete/abstract subject 5masculine/feminine (both side also contain neuter) 26 presence of cats or dogs

Table 4 : Summary of the first principal compo-nents of SBERT sentence embeddings. We assess the effect of each of these cate-gories on paraphrasing performance in the follow-

> 5SBERT all-MiniLM-L6-v2 Figure 4

: Plot of principal components 0 to 3 of SBERT sentence embeddings showing negated sentences in red and non-negated sentences in blue. ing way. We firstly calculate the value of each sentence embedding on each PC. For each PC, we then take the 10% of paraphrase embeddings that have the highest value on that PC (labelled ‘high’ in Table 5), and the 10% of paraphrase embed-dings that have the lowest value on that PC (la-belled ‘low’). We calculate the accuracy over sen-tences in the high and low categories for each PC, based on the figurative sentences whose apt para-phrases are in the high and low categories. We go on to look at the correlation of each PC with nega-tion. Table 5 gives the accuracy and correlation with negation for each PC.                                

> PC accuracy (all) prop. neg. all 0.5735 0.1220 low high low high 00.7047 0.4852 0.0604 0.1647 10.5335 0.6081 0.1625 0.1120 20.7497 0.4325 0.0110 0.2602 30.2239 0.8255 0.4083 0.0000 40.6674 0.4490 0.0209 0.2382 50.5093 0.6202 0.1581 0.0439
> Table 5

: Leftmost columns: accuracy for sentences that take the 10% lowest and highest values on the first 6 PCs. Red indicates accuracy lower than 0.5 baseline and blue indicates higher accuracy. Rightmost columns: proportion of negated sen-tences in each split. Green indicates a lower pro-portion of sentences with negation than the overall dataset and orange indicates higher. PC3 (corresponding to negation) shows the strongest relationship with model accuracy, sup-porting the previous hypothesis that models strug-gle with negation in particular. PC0 (tense), PC2 (semantically good/bad) and PC4 (concreteness) were also shown to have a strong effect on ac-curacy. In addition to PC3, many of the compo-nents show some level of correlation with nega-tion, showing that each PC does not correlate to just one aspect of language. These results point to various factors having an effect on accuracy, and that these factors are intertwined with negation. We assess the effect of concreteness and tense on model accuracy, reported in the following section. 

## 7 Concreteness and Tense 

7.1 Dataset 

We annotate Fig-QA with labels for concreteness and tense. We use SpaCy (Honnibal et al., 2020) to extract tense labels (Past or Pres) for the para-phrases. Of the 9,110 instances of the train set, there are 160 instances without a tense label; these are mostly where the paraphrase has the auxiliary verb “can”, “could”, “will” or “would”. We la-belled 4,494 sentences as Past and 4,456 as Pres .To assign concreteness ratings, we again use spaCy to extract the subject of each paraphrase. We then match the subject to a pre-compiled list of words with concreteness annotations (Brysbaert et al., 2013), where more concrete words are those that refer to perceptually salient objects, e.g. chair 

vs derivative . 203 instances lack concreteness rat-ings, due either to the paraphrase lacking a subject, or to the subject not being found in the concrete-ness list - mostly where the subject was a proper name. The sentences were then grouped into high-(a) Embedding and Mid-Phrase (b) Question-Answer Figure 5 : Model accuracy for 10% of sentences with highest and lowest concreteness rating in the Fig-QA train set using (a) the embedding and mid-phrase methods on the train set and (b) the question-answer method. The bars indicate 95% binomial confidence intervals except Llama models in (a) which are 95% bootstrap confidence intervals. The dotted line is the random baseline. est and lowest 10%, giving 911 sentences for each of high and low concreteness. 

7.2 Concreteness 

We compute accuracy across the high and low con-creteness splits, presented in Figure 5. We see that concreteness has only a small ef-fect on interpretation accuracy, particularly on the question-answer prompt style, where none of the differences were statistically significant on the train set or the test set (Figure 12, Appendix B. For the mid-phrase prompt style on the train set, we see that Llama models perform slightly bet-ter on more concrete sentences with this difference being significant for all Llama models tested. Hu-mans had a lower performance on more concrete sentences, but this was not statistically significant (p = 0 .38 ) (low concreteness: 0.956, 95% bino-mial confidence interval [0.900-0.983], high con-creteness: 0.947 [0.887-0.977]). The small effect of concreteness, paired with the correlation of PC4 with negation, suggests that the difference in accu-racy across PC4 was due to negation and not con-creteness. 

7.3 Tense 

To check the effect of tense, we split the dataset by tense annotation (past or present), and calcu-late accuracy on each split. Results are shown in Figure 6. We see that tense has a small effect on model accuracy, with all models performing slightly bet-ter at present tense sentences than past tense on the train set. This is the case with both the mid-phrase method and the question-answer method. This dif-ference was significant for all Llama models us-ing the mid-phrase method and all models with the question-answer method. On the test set, no mod-els showed a significant difference in accuracy be-tween past and present tense, including humans (past: 0.952, 95% binomial confidence interval [0.929-0.968], present: 0.941 [0.919-0.957]), Fig-ure 12, Appendix B. Again, the difference in accu-racy of SBERT across PC0 appears to be mainly due to negation. 

## 8 Interaction of Negation and Figurativeness 

We have seen that the presence of negation affects the performance of models in interpreting figura-tive language. To determine whether the differ-ence in performance is due only to negation, or whether there is an interaction between negation and figurative language, we develop a small literal negation dataset based on the Fig-QA dataset. 

8.1 Literal Negation Dataset 

We took a random sample of 128 figurative sen-tence pairs from Fig-QA, selecting pairs contain-ing one negating and one intensifying simile. Us-ing WordNet and online dictionary resources, we manually wrote literal versions of the figurative (a) Embedding and Mid-Phrase (b) Question-Answer Figure 6 : Model accuracy for sentences in the Fig-QA train set in past and present tense using (a) the embedding and mid-phrase methods on the train set and (b) the question-answer method. The bars indi-cate 95% binomial confidence intervals except Llama models in (a) which are 95% bootstrap confidence intervals. The dotted line is the random baseline.                

> Original Sentence Original Interpretation Literal Sentence Literal Interpretation This is as fun as a bowl of nachos It’s very fun This is entertaining It’s fun This is as fun as stubbing your toe It’s not fun at all This is boring It’s not fun That man has the honesty of a saint The man is very honest That man is truthful The man is honest That man has the honesty of a crook The man is not honest at all That man is deceitful The man is not honest

Table 6 : Example of two sentence pairs with negation from Fig-QA, and in the new literal dataset sentences, using a synonym and antonym of the adjective in the simile, resulting in 256 sentences with paraphrases. The paraphrases were simpli-fied such that the only difference between the two options is the negation word. For example, for the figurative sentence, He’s as busy as a sloth , the original paraphrase was He’s lazy, not busy at all .This was simplified to He’s not busy .The dataset was written by one of the authors and manually validated by the other two and two independent observers, ensuring that sentences followed the correct format and were labelled cor-rectly. Table 6 shows an example of an original sentence pair from Fig-QA and the corresponding literal pair. 

8.2 Results 

Figure 7 shows accuracy on the new literal sen-tences as well as the 256 corresponding figurative sentences from Fig-QA. Across all models and prompt styles, performance on literal sentences is greater than or equal to performance on figurative sentences. Figure 8 shows the results split between negat-ing and intensifying sentences, aggregated in the same way as Figure 3. With the mid-phrase method, models had higher accuracy on neg than 

intens sentences, as also observed in Figure 2. We also see that within the neg and intens categories, performance on literal sentences is stronger. Using the question-answer method, models generally have high performance. The models show similarly high accuracy for the different sentence groups except for figurative neg sen-tences which is lower. Models tested using the question-answer method are able to interpret nega-tion in literal sentences, but they find the interac-tion between figurativeness and negation particu-larly challenging to interpret. 

## 9 Discussion and Conclusions 

Figurative language and negation have each been shown to be challenging for LLMs. In this work, we investigated performance on their combina-tion, using the Fig-QA dataset. Our overall findings are that the combination of figurative language and negation, in particular simile, does indeed present a challenge to LLMs. (a) Embedding and Mid-Phrase (b) Question-Answer Figure 7 : Model accuracy for the literal negation dataset and the corresponding figurative sentences from Fig-QA using (a) the embedding and mid-phrase methods and (b) the question-answer method. The bars indicate 95% binomial confidence intervals except Llama models in (a) which are 95% bootstrap confidence intervals. The dotted line is the random baseline. 

> Figure 8

: Model accuracy for the literal negation dataset and the corresponding figurative sentences from Fig-QA split into negating and intensifying sentences. Bars indicate 95% bootstrap confi-dence intervals where an average over models is taken and 95% binomial confidence intervals oth-erwise. The dotted line is the random baseline. In particular, there is significant difference in per-formance across most models in processing sim-iles involving negation (Figure 2). In consider-ing different types of negation (explicit use of the word ‘not’ vs use of an antonym), patterns of model performance show differences across sen-tence types. (Figure 3). Differences in perfor-mance on negated vs intensifying similes, and on subtypes of negated similes are not seen in hu-mans on the test split of the data. Models’ per-formance on the test split does indeed show these differences, although the differences are not sig-nificant, due to the smaller size of the dataset (334 neg pairs on the test set vs 3302 on the train set). These differences in performance are not ex-hibited across concreteness, although we do see a small difference in tense. Furthermore, for the most up-to-date models, the combination of fig-urative language and negation results in particu-larly low performance, when contrasted with ei-ther negation or figurative language on their own (Figure 8, Question-Answer method). However, another key finding is that the method of eliciting responses from models has a large ef-fect. While the question-answer method generally yielded more accurate results, it could be consid-ered a further task from the real use case than the mid-phrase method, since in most cases the model would not get to see the two options. When we directly assess the phrase likelihood of different paraphrases (Figure 2a), results are strikingly dif-ferent to performance when using the question-answer prompting method (Figure 2b). We con-jecture that models may have seen negated similes in the form of irony during training, and that this may have improved performance. Overall, we find that the combination of nega-tion and figurative language presents a challenge even to modern LLMs, and that prompting meth-ods have a large effect on performance. We might say that LLMs should be fine-tuned to understand the combination of negation and figurative lan-guage, however this is a piecemeal solution. Atruly flexible and creative language user—like a human—can understand these novel combinations of phenomena without special training. It is also important to consider how language models may be used in downstream applications. We have seen that prompting styles make a big difference to performance, but that the prompting style with highest performance is one which is ar-guably less true to how linguistic phenomena may occur in the real world. We therefore argue that thought should be given to how LLM performance should be assessed with respect to their use in real-world scenarios. 

Limitations and Future Work The fact that us-ing different kinds of prompts for the same task can give drastically different results can give a deeper insight into how models interpret figurative language which could prompt further research. The new literal dataset only contains 256 sen-tences; a larger dataset would allow for further analysis breaking down negation types. Human annotations were not available for the entire dataset. A fully annotated dataset could al-low further in-depth analysis into which sentences are difficult for models and humans to interpret. 

## Acknowledgements 

We are grateful to our action editor Hinrich Schütze, and the anonymous reviewers for their comprehensive and constructive feedback which strengthened our work. Thanks to Beth Pearson (University of Bristol) and Luan Fletcher (ILLC, University of Amsterdam) for providing annota-tions on the literal dataset. This work was carried out using the computational facilities of the Ad-vanced Computing Research Centre, University of Bristol - http://www.bristol.ac.uk/acrc/. This re-search was supported by funding from the Engi-neering and Physical Sciences Research Council. 

## References 

Rodrigo Agerri. 2008. Metaphor in Textual En-tailment. In Coling 2008: Companion volume: Posters , pages 3–6, Manchester, UK. Coling 2008 Organizing Committee. Yuri Bizzoni and Shalom Lappin. 2018. Predict-ing Human Metaphor Paraphrase Judgments with Deep Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Figurative Language Pro-cessing , pages 45–55, New Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computational Linguistics. Sid Black, Leo Gao, Phil Wang, Connor Leahy, and Stella Biderman. 2021. GPT-Neo: Large Scale Autoregressive Language Modeling with Mesh-Tensorflow. Marc Brysbaert, Amy Warriner, and Victor Kuper-man. 2013. Concreteness ratings for 40 thou-sand generally known english word lemmas. 

Behavior Research Methods , 46. Cristina Cacciari and Sam Glucksberg. 1994. Un-derstanding figurative language. In Handbook of Psycholinguistics , pages 447–477. Academic Press, San Diego, CA, US. Tuhin Chakrabarty, Yejin Choi, and Vered Shwartz. 2022a. It‘s not Rocket Science: In-terpreting Figurative Language in Narratives. 

Transactions of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics , 10:589–606. Place: Cam-bridge, MA Publisher: MIT Press. Tuhin Chakrabarty, Debanjan Ghosh, Adam Po-liak, and Smaranda Muresan. 2021. Figurative Language in Recognizing Textual Entailment. In Findings of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021 , pages 3354–3361, Online. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Tuhin Chakrabarty, Arkadiy Saakyan, Deban-jan Ghosh, and Smaranda Muresan. 2022b. FLUTE: Figurative Language Understanding through Textual Explanations. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 7139– 7159, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. Alexis Conneau, Douwe Kiela, Holger Schwenk, Loïc Barrault, and Antoine Bordes. 2017. Su-pervised Learning of Universal Sentence Rep-resentations from Natural Language Inference Data. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 670–680, Copenhagen, Den-mark. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Iker García-Ferrero, Begoña Altuna, Javier Alvez, Itziar Gonzalez-Dios, and German Rigau. 2023. This is not a Dataset: A Large Negation Bench-mark to Challenge Large Language Models. In 

Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empiri-cal Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 8596–8615, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Matthew Honnibal, Ines Montani, Sofie Van Lan-deghem, and Adriane Boyd. 2020. spaCy: Industrial-strength Natural Language Process-ing in Python. Md Mosharaf Hossain, Venelin Kovatchev, Pranoy Dutta, Tiffany Kao, Elizabeth Wei, and Eduardo Blanco. 2020. An Analysis of Natural Lan-guage Inference Benchmarks through the Lens of Negation. In Proceedings of the 2020 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing (EMNLP) , pages 9106–9118, Online. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Arian Hosseini, Siva Reddy, Dzmitry Bahdanau, R Devon Hjelm, Alessandro Sordoni, and Aaron Courville. 2021. Understanding by Un-derstanding Not: Modeling Negation in Lan-guage Models. In Proceedings of the 2021 Con-ference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-man Language Technologies , pages 1301–1312, Online. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Nicholas Ichien, Dušan Stamenkovi´ c, and Keith J. Holyoak. 2024. Large language model dis-plays emergent ability to interpret novel literary metaphors. Metaphor and Symbol , 39(4):296– 309. Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin. 2025. 

Speech and Language Processing: An Intro-duction to Natural Language Processing, Com-putational Linguistics, and Speech Recognition with Language Models , 3rd edition. Online manuscript released January 12, 2025. Nora Kassner and Hinrich Schütze. 2020. Negated and Misprimed Probes for Pretrained Language Models: Birds Can Talk, But Cannot Fly. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics , pages 7811–7818, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. George Lakoff and Mark Johnson. 1980. 

Metaphors We Live By . University of Chicago Press. Emmy Liu, Chenxuan Cui, Kenneth Zheng, and Graham Neubig. 2022. Testing the Ability of Language Models to Interpret Fgurative Lan-guage. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages 4437–4452. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. AI @ Meta Llama Team. 2024. The Llama 3 Herd of Models. ArXiv:2407.21783v3 [cs.AI]. Francois Meyer and Martha Lewis. 2020. Mod-elling Lexical Ambiguity with Density Matri-ces. In Proceedings of the 24th Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning ,pages 276–290, Online. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. 2013. Efficient estima-tion of word representations in vector space. ArXiv:1301.3781v3 [cs.CL]. OpenAI. 2024a. GPT-4o System Card. ArXiv:2410.21276 [cs.CL]. OpenAI. 2024b. OpenAI o1 System Card. ArXiv:2412.16720 [cs.CL]. Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christo-pher D. Manning. 2014. GloVe: Global Vectors for Word Representation. In Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) ,pages 1532–1543. Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-BERT: Sentence Embeddings using Siamese BERT-Networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-guage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 3982–3992, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Richard M. Roberts and Roger J. Kreuz. 1994. Why Do People Use Figurative Language? Psychological Science , 5(3):159–163. Pub-lisher: SAGE Publications Inc. Ekaterina Shutova. 2010. Automatic Metaphor Interpretation as a Paraphrasing Task. In Hu-man Language Technologies: The 2010 An-nual Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics , pages 1029–1037. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. Gerard J. Steen, Aletta G. Dorst, J. Berenike Her-rmann, Anna A. Kaal, and Tina Krennmayr. 2010. Metaphor in usage. Cognitive Linguis-tics , 21(4):765–796. Publisher: De Gruyter Mouton Section: Cognitive Linguistics. Kevin Stowe, Prasetya Utama, and Iryna Gurevych. 2022. IMPLI: Investigating NLI Models’ Performance on Figurative Language. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 5375–5388, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics. Xiaoyu Tong, Rochelle Choenni, Martha Lewis, and Ekaterina Shutova. 2024. Metaphor Un-derstanding Challenge Dataset for LLMs. In 

Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 3517–3536, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Pe-ter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernan-des, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cyn-thia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee, Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra, Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi, Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian, Xi-aoqing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, An-gela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Robert Stojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Llama 2: Open Foundation and Fine-Tuned Chat Models. ArXiv:2307.09288v2 [cs.CL]. Thinh Hung Truong, Timothy Baldwin, Karin Ver-spoor, and Trevor Cohn. 2023. Language Mod-els are not Naysayers: an Analysis of Language Models on Negation Benchmarks. In Proceed-ings of the 12th Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM 2023) ,pages 101–114, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Tony Veale, Ekaterina Shutova, and Beata Beigman Klebanov. 2016. Metaphor: A Computational Perspective . Synthesis Lectures on Human Language Technologies. Springer International Publishing, Cham. A Results for Individual Mid-Phrases 

> Figure 9

: Model accuracy for the Fig-QA train set using different mid-phrases. Bars indicate 95% bi-nomial confidence intervals. The dotted line is the random baseline. 

## B Test Set Results 

> Figure 10

: Accuracy of models on the Fig-QA test set using the question-answer method. The bars indicate 95% binomial confidence intervals. The dotted line is the random baseline. 

> Figure 11

: Accuracy of models on negating and in-tensifying similes in the Fig-QA test set using the question-answer method. The bars indicate 95% binomial confidence intervals. The dotted line is the random baseline. 

> Figure 12

: Accuracy of models on sentences with high and low concreteness in the Fig-QA test set using the question-answer method. The bars indi-cate 95% binomial confidence intervals. The dot-ted line is the random baseline. Figure 13 : Accuracy of models on sentences with past and present tense in the Fig-QA test set us-ing the question-answer method. The bars indi-cate 95% binomial confidence intervals. The dot-ted line is the random baseline. 

## C Original Mid-Phrase Results 

> Figure 14

: Accuracy of models on the Fig-QA train set using the embedding and mid-phrase method with “That is to say,”. The bars indicate 95% bi-nomial confidence intervals. The dotted line is the random baseline. 

> Figure 15

: Accuracy of models on negating and intensifying similes in the Fig-QA train set using the embedding and mid-phrase method with “That is to say,”. The bars indicate 95% binomial con-fidence intervals. The dotted line is the random baseline. 

> Figure 16

: Model accuracy for the literal negation dataset and the corresponding figurative sentences from Fig-QA using the embedding and mid-phrase method with “That is to say,”. The bars indicate 95% binomial confidence intervals. The dotted line is the random baseline.