Title: Dango: A Strictly L1-Only Large Language Model for Studying Second Language Acquisition

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.19170v1

Published Time: Thu, 18 Jun 2026 01:07:20 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
## Dango: A Strictly L1-Only Large Language Model for Studying Second Language Acquisition 

Shiho Matta 1 Yin Jou Huang 1 Fei Cheng 1 Takashi Kodama 2

Hirokazu Kiyomaru 2 Yugo Murawaki 11Kyoto University 2NII-LLMC 

{matta,huang,feicheng,murawaki}@nlp.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp {tkodama,kiyomaru}@nii.ac.jp 

Abstract 

We introduce Dango , a 1.8B-parameter large language model designed for controlled stud-ies of L1 →L2 (Japanese →English) transfer in second language acquisition (SLA). While pre-vious studies have explored SLA in language models, they have predominantly relied on smaller or non-decoder models, limiting their ability to generate open-ended text and reduc-ing their suitability as practical L2 simulators. We identify a key challenge when scaling mod-els to this size: L2 contamination within the "monolingual" pretraining corpus used for L1 acquisition. To address this, we propose a fil-tering method to reduce premature exposure to English while preserving realistic, minimal ex-posure. We then fine-tune the model on LLM-generated L2-learning lessons to simulate the L2 acquisition process. Our evaluations con-firm that Dango develops human-like L2 pro-duction patterns, outperforming both unfiltered and standard multilingual baselines. We re-lease the model, data, and code to facilitate reproducible computational SLA research and learner-facing applications. 1

1 Introduction 

Second language acquisition (SLA) refers to the learning of a second language (L2) after a first lan-guage (L1) has already been acquired natively. In humans, the influence of L1 can facilitate L2 learn-ing in some cases and interfere with it in others, a phenomenon widely known as the language trans-fer effect (Lado, 1957; Odlin, 1989). This may result in overuse, avoidance, and misuse patterns of certain linguistic features in a speaker’s L2 pro-duction (Jarvis and Pavlenko, 2008). For example, because Japanese lacks a grammatical article sys-tem, Japanese-speaking learners of English often show difficulty with English article use (Murakami and Alexopoulou, 2015). This can lead to article-

> 1

We will soon release the model, data, and code. [An article forming document level translation pair: Filtered ]      

> Trends \n
> Japan is the land of trends. Nowhere else do trends arise, spread and \n
> die with such speed. The reasons for this are simple: affluent youth, merciless \n
> advertising, high population density and an insatiable appetite for ʼthe \n
> (......)
> 流⾏ \n
> ⽇本 は流⾏ り廃りの 激しい 国だ。こんなに 速いスピードで 流⾏ が⽣まれ、 広がり、そ
> して 廃れていく 国は他にない。そうなった 理由 は単純 だ。 ⼩⾦ を持った 若年層、容赦
> ない 宣伝、⾼ い⼈⼝密度、 そして 新し物好 きの 国⺠性。 \n

❌      

> [Proper nouns / Short phrases: Allowed ]
> 応募資格 IT 関連実務経験 が少しでもあれば ok ！\n
> Access 、Excel マクロ 経験 ある ⽅は尚歓迎 です！ \n̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶̶
> ハワイでは、 3⽉22 ⽇に州政府 より 緊急事態宣⾔ が発令 され、 翌⽇午後 4時より 4⽉30
> ⽇まで 不要不急 の外出 を禁⽌ する“ stay at home order ”が発令 されました。 \n

✅

Figure 1: English contamination examples: severe case of translation pairs versus minor, typical English expo-sure for Japanese speakers. 

omission errors such as “I went to library” instead of “I went to the library.” As transformer-based language models (LMs) have recently shown strong performance on many linguistic tasks (Lai et al., 2023), many studies have investigated whether they also exhibit such human-like transfer effects (Oba et al., 2023; Aoyama and Schneider, 2024; Yadavalli et al., 2023; Constanti-nescu et al., 2025). These studies train LMs from scratch first on L1 and then on L2, thereby mim-icking the order in which humans learn languages. Transfer effects are then evaluated, for example, by testing the model’s grammatical judgments on the L2 and comparing them with human tendencies (Yadavalli et al., 2023). Although these studies provide valuable insights into transfer effects in LMs, their use as practical simulators of L2 speakers remains limited. This is largely due to limitations of architecture and scale. Prior work has used either encoder-only models (Oba et al., 2023; Yadavalli et al., 2023; Constanti-nescu et al., 2025) or small decoder-only models, such as the 137M-parameter GPT-2 in Constanti-nescu et al. (2025). As a result, these models are less suitable for robust open-ended or interactive generation, and for potential applications such as L2 learner support (Lyu et al., 2024) and teacher training with virtual L2 speakers (Vasmatzoglou 1

> arXiv:2606.19170v1 [cs.CL] 17 Jun 2026

and Ní Chiaráin, 2020). To equip future SLA research with a more mod-ern and capable model, and to enable broader prac-tical applications, we release Dango , a Llama-2-like decoder-only transformer trained in an L1 →L2 manner at a much larger scale. Dango has 1.8B parameters and is pretrained on far more data than prior work, with up to 100B L1-stage tokens. To train an LLM at this size, web-crawled text is the only viable data source (Hoffmann et al., 2022). However, the Japanese web corpus we used for L1 acquisition contained substantial acciden-tal English exposure. We call this problem L2 contamination . Although Japanese speakers natu-rally see English through loanwords, proper nouns, and code-switching (Hyde, 2002; Stanlaw, 2004), systematic acquisition of English is relatively rare outside classroom-like educational settings (Barrs, 2020). It is therefore natural to reshape the corpus into a state closer to a typical Japanese speaker’s environment: removing structured English content, such as in the worst case, translation pairs, while retaining minimal English such as brand names and simple phrases (Figure 1). We designed a filtering pipeline that removes excessive English exposure, reducing the corpus size by 30% (Figure 2). In the L2 acquisition stage, we fine-tune Dango on LLM-synthesized textbook-like lessons. The lessons follow a gradual difficulty progression, as they are based on an English seed word drawn from a word list with difficulty labels. The lessons are anchored in both Japanese and English, contain-ing (i) a Japanese explanation of the seed word, (ii) an example English sentence using the word, paired with a Japanese translation, and (iii) a brief Japanese commentary highlighting relevant gram-mar or usage. In this way, Dango is exposed to English while keeping instruction and metalinguis-tic reasoning in its L1, which mirrors common textbook learning practice (Nakayama, 2022). Our experiments show that Dango acquires En-glish generation abilities, including the capacity to produce long English sentences absent from its strictly filtered pretraining data. Evaluations fur-ther show that, among all methods, Dango’s En-glish outputs most closely resemble those of hu-man Japanese learners of English, outperforming unfiltered and multilingual baselines and match-ing prompted GPT-5.5. These results provide ev-idence of successful language transfer. We re-lease Dango’s code and checkpoints to support controlled SLA research and practical applications. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Second Language Acquisition (SLA) with Language Models (LMs) Modeling SLA by Training in an L1 →L2 Setup. 

Previous studies have trained LMs on L1 and L2 sequentially to model human L2 acquisition. Oba et al. (2023) trained 18M-parameter encoder-only models and analyzed how different L1 pretraining languages shape the trajectory and ultimate success of L2 grammatical generalization. Yadavalli et al. (2023) also trained 110M-parameter encoder-only models, but aimed to isolate positive and nega-tive cross-linguistic transfer. Aoyama and Schnei-der (2024) trained 11M-parameter (our estimation) GPT-2 models as L2 English speakers, investi-gating transfer effects and showing that LM sur-prisal helps predict L2 English readers’ word-by-word reading times. Constantinescu et al. (2025) trained 125M-parameter encoder-only and 137M-parameter decoder-only models, but their focus was on recreating the critical period effect observed in humans rather than directly examining transfer ef-fects. 

Training Data. Training data is central to mod-eling SLA. Some work has attempted to create a more human-like setting by using data derived from human speech. For example, Yadavalli et al. (2023) used child-directed speech, and Constanti-nescu et al. (2025) partially used spoken-language data. However, these data sources are limited in size, and Constantinescu et al. (2025) had to in-clude web text to obtain sufficient data and cross-linguistic coverage. On the other hand, Oba et al. (2023) and Aoyama and Schneider (2024) relied on CC-100 (Conneau et al., 2020; Wenzek et al., 2020) web-crawled data for L1 training. 

Evaluating Transfer Effect. Oba et al. (2023), Aoyama and Schneider (2024), Yadavalli et al. (2023), and Constantinescu et al. (2025) used BLiMP (Warstadt et al., 2020) to measure the L2 (English) grammatical generalization. Other probes include perplexity (Aoyama and Schneider, 2024; Constantinescu et al., 2025), model surprisal (Aoyama and Schneider, 2024) and knowledge-based multiple-choice tasks (Constantinescu et al., 2025). However, because these probes rely entirely on the predefined inputs within existing benchmarks, they do not truly test a model’s generation ability. To address this limitation, we evaluate the transfer 2L1 (Japanese) Acquisition   

> Dango -pretrained (1.8B)
> 100B Tokens
> Japanese 🇯🇵 Corpus

✨ Non -Japanese   

> Contamination
> (30%)
> Filtered
> Pure Japanese Text
> With minor English exposur e

🇯🇵 👍 

🇺🇸 

🇷🇺 

🇨🇳  

> Training Tokens
> Linguistic
> Proficiency
> GPT -5.2

# 🧠  

> Dango
> Dango
> Unfiltered
> L2 ( Eng 🇺🇸 )
> Learning Data

# 🍡 

> Multilingual

🇺🇸 

🇺🇸 

🇺🇸  

> L2 (English)
> Acquisition

Transfer Effect Assessmen t

> Human (L1= 🇯🇵 )

🇺🇸 

> GPT -4o

# 🧠 

> L2 Feature Analyzer

# 🔍 

> L2 Feature Distributions
> Close!
> Fine -tune
> L2 Productions

Figure 2: An overview of our proposed methodology. 

effect in Dango’s English text production using the automatic LLM-as-a-judge framework introduced by Gao et al. (2025). We directly annotate linguistic features in the model’s output to compare their distribution with authentic human L2 productions. 

2.2 Controlling Knowledge Exposure during Pretraining LLMs with Knowledge Cutoff. Recent efforts highlight the necessity of strictly constrained pre-training environments to isolate specific phenom-ena from the massive data contamination inher-ent in standard LLMs. For instance, TimeCap-sule LLM is trained exclusively on texts from con-strained historical periods to accurately emulate the vocabulary and worldview of that era without the intrusion of modern concepts. 2 Similarly, History LLMs are trained from scratch using strict temporal knowledge cutoffs to completely prevent the leak-age of future knowledge. 3 These projects demon-strate that true behavioral simulation requires a verifiable, uncontaminated training baseline. 

L2 Contamination in Web Corpora. L2 con-tamination matters in controlled studies of second-language acquisition and transfer effects. Because language identification is imperfect, corpora in-tended to be non-English often still contain English data (Caswell et al., 2020). In controlled experi-ments, such accidental exposure can be problem-atic because it may introduce unintended cross-linguistic transfer (Blevins and Zettlemoyer, 2022). This issue may also apply to prior work that used web corpora for training (Oba et al., 2023; Aoyama and Schneider, 2024; Constantinescu et al., 2025), although any resulting failures may have been too subtle to detect at their scale. To our knowledge, 

> 2https://github.com/haykgrigo3/TimeCapsuleLLM
> 3https://github.com/DGoettlich/history-llms

our work is the first to directly address the L2 con-tamination problem in computational SLA. 

3 Methodology 

The training of Dango consists of two stages (Fig-ure 2). First, we model L1 (Japanese) acquisition by pretraining a decoder-only language model on a strictly filtered Japanese corpus (§ 3.1), which yields the Dango-pretrained model. Second, we model L2 (English) acquisition by fine-tuning the pretrained model on LLM-generated L2 learning data, yielding Dango (§ 3.2). 

3.1 L1 Acquisition 

We conducted filtering to remove non-Japanese ex-posures in a Japanese corpus and trained a decoder-only transformer model on the resulting data. 

3.1.1 Corpus for L1 Acquisition and Filtering 

To bootstrap our study from an established base-line, we adopted llm-jp-corpus-v3, the training corpus released by the llm-jp project. 4 The full corpus is multilingual, containing Japanese, En-glish, Chinese, Korean, and code data. In this work, we used only the Japanese portion, which is mainly composed of Japanese Common Crawl data 5 and PDF data from the National Diet Li-brary’s Web Archiving Project (WARP). 6 Never-theless, we observed that this subset still included a non-negligible amount of English text. We built a filtering pipeline to limit exposure to English grammar and long, structured English sen-tences that could confound L1 →L2 transfer (Barrs, 2020; Blevins and Zettlemoyer, 2022), while retain-ing benign English signals common in Japanese   

> 4https://gitlab.llm-jp.nii.ac.jp/datasets/ llm-jp-corpus-v3/-/tree/main
> 5https://commoncrawl.org .
> 6National Diet Library (Japan). NDL Web Archiving Project (WARP), https://warp.ndl.go.jp/ .

3text, such as everyday words, phrases, and proper nouns (Hyde, 2002; Stanlaw, 2004). The pipeline combines a whitelist filter with blocklist filters applied at both the document and line levels. The whitelist filter defines the charac-ter inventory allowed for Japanese-centric text, in-cluding Japanese scripts, common CJK characters, punctuation, symbols, and other frequent marks. Documents with more than 1‰ out-of-inventory characters are discarded, which removes most text in non-CJK and non-Latin scripts, such as Russian and Arabic. Next, blocklist filters remove lines separated by “\n” that contain excessive English or Chinese characters. For example, the English filter removes a line if it contains more than four consecutive English words, more than 20 Latin let-ters, or a Japanese-to-English character ratio below 40%. If more than 5% of a document’s lines are removed, the entire document is discarded to avoid damaged context. Further implementation details are provided in Appendix A. 

3.1.2 Pretraining an L1-Only LLM 

We pretrained a 1.8B-parameter Llama 2–style decoder-only Transformer from scratch on the cor-pus described in § 3.1.1. To our knowledge, this is the largest model trained from scratch for studying second language acquisition. Pretraining details are provided in Appendix C. We adopted the pretrained multilingual tokenizer from the released llm-jp-3 model, which uses a vo-cabulary of 99,584 tokens covering both Japanese and English. We acknowledge that this gives the model access to L2 subword units from initializa-tion. We leave experiments with more human-like tokenization assumptions to future work. 7

3.1.3 Linguistic Proficiency Assessments. 

We monitor the model’s linguistic proficiency dur-ing L1 pretraining to assess whether it effectively acquires Japanese and whether unwanted language contamination occurs after filtering. 

Assessing Japanese Proficiency. We assess Japanese proficiency along two dimensions: gram-matical knowledge and general Japanese-language ability. For grammatical knowledge, we use JBLiMP (Someya and Oseki, 2023), a Japanese benchmark in the style of BLiMP (Warstadt et al., 2020). Models are evaluated on minimal pairs that differ in a targeted grammatical property; an item 

> 7https://huggingface.co/llm-jp/llm-jp-3-1.8b

is correct if the model assigns higher probability to the grammatical sentence. Performance is reported as accuracy, with chance at 50%. For general Japanese-language ability, we use llm-jp-eval-v1.4.1 , 8 a few-shot benchmark (Brown et al., 2020) covering diverse tasks such as natural language inference and multiple-choice question answering. Programming and mathematical tasks are excluded. 

Assessing English Leakage. We use the English section of MultiBLiMP (Jumelet et al., 2025), an-other BLiMP style benchmark. 

Assessing Other Leakage. We assess Russian and Chinese proficiency using the Russian part in MultiBLiMP and ZhoBLiMP (Liu et al., 2025). 

3.2 L2 Acquisition 

To introduce Dango to English, we synthesized English learning data using an off-the-shelf multi-lingual LLM and fine-tuned the model. 

3.2.1 Synthesizing L2-Learning Data with LLM 

We generate parallel, lesson-style data for English L2 learning using a strong multilingual LLM. Each example is centered on a seed word from the CEFR-J vocabulary list (Tono, 2019), a CEFR-based (Council of Europe, 2001) inventory tailored to Japanese learners. Since the original CEFR-J an-notations cover only A1–B2, we use an externally annotated extension to include words up to C2. We refer to the combined inventory as CEFR-J through-out the paper. 9

As shown in Figure 11, we prompt the LLM to generate: (i) a detailed explanation of the seed word, (ii) an example sentence containing the word and its Japanese translation, and (iii) an analysis of salient usage patterns in the example. Since the prompt controls sentence difficulty, average sentence length and complexity increases with the CEFR-J level of the seed word (Figure 14). Both the lexical explanation and usage analysis are writ-ten in Japanese, reflecting textbook-style English learning for Japanese speakers and encouraging Japanese-to-English transfer. The above setup yields the English–Japanese 

(Eng–Jpn) setting, where the model generates an  

> 8https://github.com/llm-jp/scripts/tree/main/ evaluation/installers/llm-jp-eval-v1.4.1
> 9https://github.com/openlanguageprofiles/ olp-en-cefrj/tree/master , C1/C2 labels are from the Octanove Vocabulary Profile (CC BY-SA 4.0).

4English sentence followed by its Japanese trans-lation. We also create a Japanese–English (Jpn– Eng) variant by simply swapping the English and Japanese sentences in the data. 

3.2.2 Fine-tuning on L2 Learning Data 

We simulate L2 acquisition by fine-tuning models on L2 learning data. Each training example follows a prompt format in which the user asks for an ex-planation of a word and the assistant provides the corresponding L2 learning response (Figure 12). By combining data from different CEFR levels, we train models that mimic L2 learners at specific proficiency stages (see § 5.1). 

3.2.3 Assessing L2 Acquisition Progress 

We evaluate L2 acquisition progress with BLEU scores on Eng–Jpn and Jpn–Eng translation. We use the translation component of a held-out subset of the L2 learning data for in-distribution testing, and Jpn–Eng parallel sentences from Tatoeba for out-of-distribution evaluation. 10 

3.2.4 L1–L2 Transfer Assessment 

To directly quantify L1–L2 transfer effects, we adopt an LLM-as-a-judge evaluation protocol fol-lowing Gao et al. (2025) to analyze the patterns in the English productions and compare that to human performance. We prompt a judge LLM to extract instances of seven English linguistic fea-ture categories (excluding Speech Acts ) from model outputs and to assess their contextual correctness: 

Number Agreement (local number concord inside noun phrases), Tense Agreement (tense choices con-sistent with temporal cues), Subject–Verb Agree-ment (verb inflection matching the subject), Modal Verbs and Expressions , Quantifiers and Numerals ,

Noun–Verb Collocations (conventional verb–noun pairings supporting fluent lexical selection), and 

Reference Word (referential devices such as pro-nouns/demonstratives that maintain discourse con-tinuity). As shown in Figure 16, the judge identifies each instance of a target feature in a translation output and returns (i) the exact text span and (ii) a binary label indicating whether the usage is correct in context. From these analysis outputs, we derive for each category (a) a Usage Frequency (UF) 

distribution (how often the feature appears) and  

> 10 https://tatoeba.org . Created by volunteer contribu-tors from the Tatoeba community. Text data licensed under CC BY 2.0 FR. Downloaded 2025-12-05.

(b) an Error Rate (ER) distribution (how often detected instances are incorrect). Finally, we examine whether Dango produces English texts that share UF and ER distributions similarly to a human English learner. We apply the same llm-as-a-judge method to extract feature distributions from the ICNALE Written Essays (Ishikawa, 2013, 2023) corpus. This corpus con-tains topic-centric essays written by English learn-ers of various L1 backgrounds, including Japanese. We use Jensen–Shannon divergence (JSD) to cap-ture distributional shift in UF, and Bray-Curtis Dis-similarity (BCD) in addition to JSD in ER to better reflect raw error count shifts (Appendix J.1). We also provide an extended analysis comparing model L2 production against ICNALE Spoken Dialogues (Ishikawa, 2019) in Appendix J.2. 

4 Experiments and Results for L1 (Japanese) Acquisition 

In this section, we describe the experimental setup and evaluation results for pretraining Dango-pretrained, the L1-only LLM. For brevity, we may omit the “-pretrained” suffix when referring to the pretrained models in this section. 

4.1 Experimental Settings 

We detail the data preparation and training method for Dango-pretrained and the baselines. 

Training-based Baselines. For training-based baselines, we trained an unfiltered model and used the llm-jp-3 models as multilingual baselines. The unfiltered model was trained on the Japanese portion of llm-jp-corpus-v3 without the filtering described in § 3.1.1. We obtained the llm-jp-3-pretrained checkpoints by contacting the llm-jp team directly. These models have the same size, architecture, and training method as Dango; they differ only in the training data used. 

L1 Corpus Filtering and Statistics. Detailed filtering parameters are provided in Appendix A. Filtering removed 30% of documents (Table 9); the remaining documents were further stripped of English-heavy lines through line-level filtering. Figures 6 and 7 show document- and phrase-level contamination removed by the English filter. How-ever, short English phrases, such as common daily words and proper nouns, may remain (Figure 8). Thus, Dango can still learn weak word- or phrase-level English associations, but not the ability to 50 20 40 60 80 100 

> Training tokens / billion (B)
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> AVG (wo CG/MT/MR)  llm-jp-eval-v1.4.1
> dango-pretrained
> unfiltered-pretrained
> llm-jp-3-pretrained

(a) Japanese (llm-jp-eval-v1.4.1) 0 20 40 60 80 100 

> Training tokens / billion (B)
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1.0
> Accuracy
> JBLiMP: Japanese Performance
> dango-pretrained
> unfiltered-pretrained
> llm-jp-3-pretrained

(b) Japanese (JBLiMP) 0 20 40 60 80 100 

> Training tokens / billion (B)
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1.0
> Accuracy
> MultiBLiMP: English Performance
> dango-pretrained
> unfiltered-pretrained
> llm-jp-3-pretrained

(c) English (MultiBLiMP) 0 20 40 60 80 100 

> Training tokens / billion (B)
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1.0
> Accuracy
> MultiBLiMP: Russian Performance
> dango-pretrained
> unfiltered-pretrained
> llm-jp-3-pretrained

(d) Russian (MultiBLiMP) 0 20 40 60 80 100 

> Training tokens / billion (B)
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> Accuracy
> ZhoBLiMP: Chinese Performance
> dango-pretrained
> unfiltered-pretrained
> llm-jp-3-pretrained

(e) Chinese (ZhoBLiMP) 

Figure 3: Linguistic proficiency assessments across the L1-pretraining stage. 

generate long, coherent English sentences after L1 pretraining, as shown in Appendix E. 

L1 Pretraining Details. Dango-pretrained was trained on 100B tokens from the filtered corpus. Compute-optimal scaling suggests that a 1.8B-parameter model is optimally trained on roughly 35B tokens (Hoffmann et al., 2022); however, we trained for about 3 × more tokens because its Japanese generalization continued improving be-yond 35B tokens (Figure 3a). Additional pretrain-ing details are provided in Appendix C. 

4.2 Linguistic Proficiency Assessments 

We track the linguistic proficiency of the pretrained models over a 10B-token training interval. 11 

Japanese Proficiency. On llm-jp-eval (Figure 3a), Dango performs slightly below llm-jp-3 as training approaches 100B tokens (-0.029). A cate-gory breakdown is provided in Appendix D. On JBLiMP (Figure 3b), Dango outperforms both baselines in early stage (1B and 10B tokens), likely because it is trained on nearly pure Japanese data. As training continues, the gap closes and all models reach comparable performance. Overall, Dango attains Japanese ability roughly on par with the unfiltered and llm-jp-3 models. 

English Proficiency. On the English portion of MultiBLiMP (Figure 3c), llm-jp-3 saturates after only 10B tokens, likely because roughly half of its training tokens are English. In contrast, Dango remains near 0.65 even after 100B tokens. The unfiltered model indicates that naive training on a “Japanese” corpus can still yield strong English proficiency, reaching 0.917. These results suggest that filtering prevents Dango’s English ability from scaling with addi-tional pretraining. The case study in Appendix E further shows that Dango’s English remains largely 

> 11

In Figure 3, the leftmost points on the plot correspond to models trained on 1B tokens. 

n-gram-like, likely because the filtering rule re-moves sequences of more than four consecutive English words. 

Other L2 Leakage. As an additional check for L2 leakage, we evaluate Russian and Chinese (Fig-ures 3d and 3e) to assess the effectiveness of the whitelist and Chinese filter. All three models per-form poorly, but Dango shows the lowest profi-ciency in both languages. 

5 Experiments and Results for L2 (English) Acquisition 

5.1 Experimental Settings Synthesizing L2 Learning Data. We used GPT-5.2 to synthesize 9.9K textbook-style L2-learning examples from the CEFR-J word list, generating one example per target word. The dataset com-prises 8,938 training, 494 validation, and 501 test examples. See Appendices F.1 and F.3 for prompt design and additional synthesis statistics. Before fine-tuning on the L2 learning data, we first trained the model on Ichikara, a Japanese instruction-following dataset. 12 This step was in-tended to strengthen instruction-following behavior in the model’s native language and to enable the case studies in § 4.2 (Appendix E). 

Fine-tuning on L2 Learning Data. We trained separate models for six CEFR-J proficiency lev-els under two direction settings: English–Japanese (Eng–Jpn) and Japanese–English (Jpn–Eng). For a given target level, we used cumulative data from all levels up to and including that level (e.g., B2 uses A1+A2+B1+B2). See Appendix F.2 and G for additional fine-tuning details. 

5.2 L2 Proficiency Development Assessment 

Figure 4 shows Jpn–Eng translation performance across difficulty levels for Dango and llm-jp-3 trained on different mixtures of difficulties. Results for the Eng–Jpn direction are shown in Appendix H. 

> 12

Visit this link for the Ichikara dataset (CC-BY-NC-SA). 

6Figure 4: Dango and llm-jp-3 Japanese-to-English translation performance when trained and evaluated on different levels of data. The stair-shaped black line separates seen levels (lower left) from unseen levels (upper right). 

For Tatoeba, we randomly sampled 1,000 sentence pairs from the downloaded dataset. We provide a human analysis of whether the BLEU score cap-tures meaningful L2 development in Appendix I. 

5.2.1 Japanese–English Translation General observations. When trained and evalu-ated on the same difficulty level, for example A1, Dango produces understandable English transla-tions and reaches a BLEU score of 31.7. At this level, llm-jp-3 outperforms Dango with a +37.2 BLEU advantage. Performance improves as the training and evalu-ation settings expand. When trained on all levels from A1 to C2 and evaluated on C2, Dango reaches 21.6 BLEU. Qualitatively, it often preserves the core meaning in long sentences, but with frequent lexical and grammatical errors (see Appendix I.1). Overall, llm-jp-3 consistently outperforms Dango, likely due to its multilingual pretraining. Both models can generalize to unseen levels and Tatoeba data to some extent. For example, when trained on A1–B2 data, Dango generalizes to C1 (21.2) and C2 (15.8). Being multilingual, llm-jp-3 generalizes better, achieving 27.9 and 25.2. 

Training on more difficult data improves per-formance at easier levels. Training with more difficult data consistently enhances performance on easier test sets. For instance, when evaluated on B1, Dango sees a +12.5 BLEU gain when training expands from A1–B1 to A1–C2, whereas llm-jp-3 gains only +5.7 BLEU. This demonstrates that Dango learns effectively from the L2-learning data. 

5.3 Transfer Effect Assessment Baselines. In addition to the training-based meth-ods (Dango, unfiltered, and llm-jp-3), we adopt the prompting-based L2 speaker simulation method from Gao et al. (2025), where an LLM is in-structed to generate L2 English text conditioned on                    

> Model JSD of UF JSD of ER BCD of ER Training-based methods
> Dango 0.0104 0.0110 0.2467
> Unfiltered 0.0176 0.0304 0.2502
> llm-jp-3 0.0249 0.0487 0.6982
> Prompting-based methods
> llm-jp-3.1-instruct 0.0346 0.0658 0.8523 GPT-4o 0.0028 0.0374 0.5295 GPT-5.5 0.0084 0.0191 0.1925

Table 1: LLM output linguistic feature distribution diver-gences to human Written Essay produced by Japanese learners. Lower is more similar.              

> Human L1 JSD of UF JSD of ER BCD of ER
> Japanese 0.0104 0.0110 0.2467
> Korean 0.0111 0.0094 0.1078
> Mandarin 0.0140 0.0161 0.3509 Thai 0.0155 0.0221 0.1272

Table 2: Linguistic feature divergences between Dango and humans with different L1 backgrounds. 

prompts containing a specified L1 background and L1-dependent linguistic traits. We evaluate three LLMs in this setting: llm-jp-3.1-instruct, 13 GPT-4o, 14 and GPT-5.5. 15 For GPT-4o and GPT-5.5, we follow the original prompt design, modifying it to output English translations (Figure 21 and 23); for llm-jp-3.1-instruct, we use a simplified role-playing and error-injection prompt (Figure 24) due to its smaller size and shorter context limit. Both approaches offer distinct advantages. Prompting-based methods are highly accessible, utilizing off-the-shelf LLMs without the need for additional training. Conversely, training-based  

> 13 We used the 1.8B model: https://huggingface.co/ llm-jp/llm-jp-3.1-1.8b-instruct4
> 14 https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o/
> 15 https://openai.com/index/ introducing-gpt-5-5/

7models allow us to trace the transfer effect directly back to the L1 →L2 training process itself. This iso-lates the learning mechanism from the confounding effects of an LLM simply “role-playing” to mask its actual proficiency, providing a stronger foundation for future controlled studies and interpretability research. As described in § 3.2.4, we first construct UF and ER distributions for human and model English productions. We then compute JSD and BCD for human–model pairs to identify which models best match human transfer patterns. Here, we report results on ICNALE Written Essays; Appendix J.2 presents the corresponding analysis on ICNALE Spoken Dialogues, confirming the robustness of our findings. For trained baselines, we use models trained on A1–B2 data, since the ICNALE learners are below B2 level. 

Focusing on JSD of UF. Table 1 shows that, among trained baselines, Dango is closer to Japanese L1 speakers than the unfiltered model or llm-jp-3 in terms of UF divergence. In other words, Dango has more human-like overuse and avoidance patterns over the seven feature categories. Compared with prompting baselines, GPT-4o and GPT-5.5 show UF distributions closer to hu-mans, slightly outperforming Dango. In contrast, llm-jp-3.1-instruct remains the most distant, likely due to its small size and limited exposure to such role-play prompts during training. It generally failed to output systematic English grammar errors, even when prompted to do so. Table 2 shows Dango’s UF divergence from hu-man English learners across L1 backgrounds. The pattern broadly aligns with the degree of structural overlap with Japanese (Table 8): Dango is most similar to Japanese learners, followed by Korean, likely due to shared SOV word order and similar particle systems. Mandarin shows greater diver-gence, while Thai diverges the most, reflecting its limited structural similarity to Japanese. 

Focusing on JSD of ER. In Table 1, Dango achieves the lowest ER JSD among all methods, indicating that its error distribution is closest to that of human learners. Compared with non-Japanese L1 learners (Table 2), Dango is closest to Korean speakers, followed by Japanese speakers. We at-tribute this to the close linguistic distance between Japanese and Korean, and interpret it as evidence that Dango captures L1-induced transfer effects. 

> Figure 5: Error Rates (raw values) of human and LLMs.

Focusing on BCD of ER. Dango achieves the second-lowest ER BCD in Table 1. GPT-5.5 ob-tains the lowest BCD and remains balanced across the other metrics, suggesting that it also models Japanese–English transfer effects well. In contrast, the other multilingual baselines show large BCD values because their absolute error rates differ sub-stantially from human learners (Figure 5): llm-jp-3 and llm-jp-3.1-instruct rarely make grammar errors, whereas GPT-4o produces too many. Overall, these results suggest that Dango’s En-glish productions broadly align with a Japanese L1 speaker profile. Together with the additional analysis in Appendix J.2, they show that filtering L2 exposure in the Japanese corpus improves L2 speaker modeling, as the unfiltered baseline per-forms worse than Dango on all measured metrics. 

5.4 Analysis on Dango’s English Production 

We present a case study on Dango’s English produc-tion in Figure 20, with a focus on its error patterns. We observe that Dango makes many grammatical and phrasing errors typical of Japanese speakers, such as preposition, article form, and tense errors. We also observed that it sometimes mistranslates Japanese words literally into English, mirroring a strategy L2 speakers often use when they lack the vocabulary for a specific concept (Færch and Kasper, 1983). 

6 Conclusions 

We presented Dango , a 1.8B-parameter Japanese L1-only decoder LLM trained on a strictly fil-tered corpus to study L1 →L2 transfer. By fine-tuning on LLM-generated English-learning lessons, Dango exhibits learner-like transfer patterns closer to Japanese L2 speakers than other trained base-lines, on par with prompted GPT-5.5. We release Dango to advance controlled SLA studies and fa-cilitate practical learner-facing applications. 8Limitations 

Tokenizer and vocabulary. Dango uses a pre-trained multilingual tokenizer with substantial En-glish subword coverage. This choice improves training stability and enables direct comparison to llm-jp-3, but it also means Dango does not fully learn its vocabulary from scratch under an L1-only constraint. Importantly, however, the token em-beddings themselves are learned from scratch dur-ing pretraining. Future work could explore tok-enizer choices and dynamic vocabulary expansion schemes during L2 exposure to better approximate staged, human-like acquisition. 

Single model and single L1 →L2 setting. We study a single model scale (1.8B parameters) due to the high cost of pretraining, and we focus on one transfer direction (Japanese →English) because English is a common and practically important L2. Future work can extend this framework to larger model scales and additional L1 →L2 pairs span-ning a wider range of linguistic distances to better characterize the generality of our findings. 

AI Assistance in This Work 

We utilized AI-based tools primarily to refine the writing style and improve the grammatical accuracy of this manuscript. Additionally, we employed AI assistance for data visualization and minor coding support. The authors carefully reviewed and veri-fied all AI-assisted content, figures, and code, and we take full responsibility for the final manuscript and its outcomes. 

References 

Tatsuya Aoyama and Nathan Schneider. 2024. Model-ing nonnative sentence processing with L2 language models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 4927–4940, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Keith Barrs. 2020. Learning from the linguistic land-scape: A project-based learning approach to investi-gating english in japan. Electronic Journal of Foreign Language Teaching , 17. Terra Blevins and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2022. Language contamination helps explains the cross-lingual capa-bilities of English pretrained models. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-ural Language Processing , pages 3563–3574, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, and 12 others. 2020. Lan-guage models are few-shot learners. Preprint ,arXiv:2005.14165. Isaac Caswell, Theresa Breiner, Daan van Esch, and Ankur Bapna. 2020. Language ID in the wild: Unex-pected challenges on the path to a thousand-language web text corpus. In Proceedings of the 28th Inter-national Conference on Computational Linguistics ,pages 6588–6608, Barcelona, Spain (Online). Inter-national Committee on Computational Linguistics. Alexis Conneau, Kartikay Khandelwal, Naman Goyal, Vishrav Chaudhary, Guillaume Wenzek, Francisco Guzmán, Edouard Grave, Myle Ott, Luke Zettle-moyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2020. Unsupervised cross-lingual representation learning at scale. In Pro-ceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 8440– 8451, Online. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Ionut Constantinescu, Tiago Pimentel, Ryan Cotterell, and Alex Warstadt. 2025. Investigating critical pe-riod effects in language acquisition through neural language models. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 13:96–120. Council of Europe. 2001. Common European Frame-work of Reference for Languages: Learning, Teach-ing, Assessment . Cambridge University Press, Cam-bridge. Claus Færch and Gabriele Kasper, editors. 1983. Strate-gies in Interlanguage Communication . Longman Publishing Group, London; New York. Rena Gao, Xuetong Wu, Tatsuki Kuribayashi, Mingrui Ye, Siya Qi, Carsten Roever, Yuanxing Liu, Zheng Yuan, and Jey Han Lau. 2025. Can LLMs simulate L2-English dialogue? an information-theoretic anal-ysis of L1-dependent biases. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 4355–4379, Vienna, Austria. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, Tom Hennigan, Eric Noland, Katie Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan Damoc, Aurelia Guy, Simon Osindero, Karen Si-monyan, Erich Elsen, and 3 others. 2022. Training compute-optimal large language models. Preprint ,arXiv:2203.15556. Barbara Hyde. 2002. Japan’s emblematic english. En-glish Today , 18:12–16. 

9Shin’ichiro Ishikawa. 2013. The icnale and sophis-ticated contrastive interlanguage analysis of asian learners of english. Learner Corpus Studies in Asia and the World , 1:91–118. Shin’ichiro Ishikawa. 2023. The ICNALE Guide: An Introduction to a Learner Corpus Study on Asian Learners’ L2 English , 1 edition. Routledge. Shin’ichiro Ishikawa. 2019. The icnale spoken dialogue: A new dataset for the study of asian learners’ perfor-mance in l2 english interviews. ENGLISH TEACH-ING , 74:153–177. Scott Jarvis and Aneta Pavlenko. 2008. Crosslinguistic influence in language and cognition . Routledge. Jaap Jumelet, Leonie Weissweiler, Joakim Nivre, and Arianna Bisazza. 2025. Multiblimp 1.0: A massively multilingual benchmark of linguistic minimal pairs. 

Preprint , arXiv:2504.02768. Robert Lado. 1957. Linguistics Across Cultures: Ap-plied Linguistics for Language Teachers . University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor. Viet Dac Lai, Nghia Ngo, Amir Pouran Ben Veyseh, Hieu Man, Franck Dernoncourt, Trung Bui, and Thien Huu Nguyen. 2023. ChatGPT beyond En-glish: Towards a comprehensive evaluation of large language models in multilingual learning. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 13171–13189, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yikang Liu, Yeting Shen, Hongao Zhu, Lilong Xu, Zhi-heng Qian, Siyuan Song, Kejia Zhang, Jialong Tang, Pei Zhang, Baosong Yang, Rui Wang, and Hai Hu. 2025. A systematic assessment of language models with linguistic minimal pairs in chinese. Preprint ,arXiv:2411.06096. Boning Lyu, Chun Lai, and Jianing Guo. 2024. Effec-tiveness of chatbots in improving language learning: A meta-analysis of comparative studies. Interna-tional Journal of Applied Linguistics .Akira Murakami and Theodora Alexopoulou. 2015. L1 influence on the acquisition order of english gram-matical morphemes. Studies in Second Language Acquisition , 38:365–401. Shusaku Nakayama. 2022. A close examination of vocabulary in japanese efl textbooks. In JALT2021 Postconference Publication: Reflections and New Perspectives , pages 209–216. Japan Association for Language Teaching (JALT). Miyu Oba, Tatsuki Kuribayashi, Hiroki Ouchi, and Taro Watanabe. 2023. Second language acquisition of neural language models. In Findings of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 ,pages 13557–13572, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Terence Odlin. 1989. Language Transfer: Cross-Linguistic Influence in Language Learning . Cam-bridge University Press, Cambridge. Taiga Someya and Yohei Oseki. 2023. JBLiMP: Japanese benchmark of linguistic minimal pairs. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: EACL 2023 , pages 1581–1594, Dubrovnik, Croatia. Association for Computational Linguistics. James Stanlaw. 2004. Japanese English: Language and Culture Contact . Hong Kong University Press. Yukio Tono. 2019. Coming full circle—from cefr to cefr-j and back. CEFR Journal—Research and Prac-tice , 1. Areti Vasmatzoglou and Neasa Ní Chiaráin. 2020. The development of an online game-based simulation for the training of english language teachers in virtual en-vironments. In Karen-Margrete Frederiksen, Sanne Larsen, Linda Bradley, and Sylvie Thouësny, edi-tors, CALL for Widening Participation: Short Papers from EUROCALL 2020 , pages 334–341. Research-publishing.net, Voillans, France. Alex Warstadt, Alicia Parrish, Haokun Liu, Anhad Mo-hananey, Wei Peng, Sheng-Fu Wang, and Samuel R. Bowman. 2020. BLiMP: The benchmark of linguis-tic minimal pairs for English. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 8:377– 392. Guillaume Wenzek, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Alexis Con-neau, Vishrav Chaudhary, Francisco Guzmán, Ar-mand Joulin, and Edouard Grave. 2020. CCNet: Extracting high quality monolingual datasets from web crawl data. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Lan-guage Resources and Evaluation Conference , pages 4003–4012, Marseille, France. European Language Resources Association. Aditya Yadavalli, Alekhya Yadavalli, and Vera Tobin. 2023. SLABERT talk pretty one day: Modeling second language acquisition with BERT. In Proceed-ings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 11763–11777, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

10 A Filtering Pipeline Design and Statistics 

Our filtering pipeline for constructing a high-quality Japanese pretraining corpus consists of three stages: (1) a Unicode whitelist filter, (2) an English (Latin-script) blocklist filter, and (3) a Chi-nese blocklist filter. Table 10 summarizes the pa-rameter settings used in each stage. 

Unicode whitelist filter. This filter drops a doc-ument if the fraction of characters outside a prede-fined Unicode whitelist exceeds a threshold. The whitelist includes Japanese kana, CJK ideographs, punctuation, emojis, and ASCII characters (which may include Latin letters). CJK ideographs con-tains Chinese characters used by Chinese, Japanese (as Kanji), and Korean (as Hanja). Therefore, Ko-rean Hanguls does not pass the whitelist filter. Chi-nese characters and English (Latin) characters may pass this stage, and are handled by the subsequent blocklist filters. For other languages, if a document contains, e.g., Cyrillic, characters totaling more than 0.1% of all characters, the entire document is removed from the corpus. 

English (Latin) filter. This filter operates at the line level (lines are split by “\n”). It removes lines that contain excessive Latin-script content, and drops the entire document if too many lines are removed (to avoid broken context). A line is removed if any of the following conditions hold: (i) it contains more than 20 Latin characters; (ii) the ratio of Latin to non-Latin characters exceeds 40%; or (iii) it contains more than four consecutive Latin words separated by spaces. Lines containing fewer than eight Latin characters are ignored, as we consider such cases harmless. Finally, if more than 5% of lines in a document are removed, we drop the document. 

Chinese filter. To reduce Chinese text (primar-ily Simplified Chinese) in the corpus, we construct a character-level blocklist of ideographs that are highly indicative of Chinese-only usage. The block-list is derived from the Unihan BMP list. 16 If any character from this blocklist appears in a line, the line is removed. If more than 0.1% of lines are re-moved from a document, the document is dropped. 

Filtering outcome. Applying the full pipeline removes approximately 30% of documents from the original corpus, highlighting the need for strict filtering when building a Japanese L1 pretraining 

> 16

https://unicode.org/charts/unihan.html     

> (......)
> 若年女性 の流行
> Trends Japan is the land of trends. Nowhere else do trends arise, spread and \n
> die with such speed. The reasons for this are simple: affluent youth, merciless \n
> advertising, high population density and an insatiable appetite for ’the \n
> (......)
> 流行
> 日本は流行り廃りの 激しい 国だ。こんなに 速いスピ ードで流
> 行が生まれ 、広がり 、そして 廃れていく 国は他にない 。そう なった 理由は単純だ。小金を持った 若年層、容赦ない 宣伝、
> 高い人口密度、そして 新し物好きの 国民性。\n
> (......)

Figure 6: Contamination: document-level parallel data.                 

> (......)
> 左ひだり left (side) \n
> 折おれて turn (toward) \n
> 血塔けっとう Bloody Tower \n
> 門もん gate \n
> 入はいる enter \n
> 今いま now; the present \n
> 昔むかし long ago; ancient times \n
> 薔薇 しょうびの 乱らん War of the Roses (15th century struggle for the throne of England) \n
> (......)

Figure 7: Contamination: word/phrase-level parallel data. 

dataset. After filtering, the corpus’s total token count shrank from 592B to 376B. 

B Filtered Documents: Case Study 

The English (Latin-script) blocklist filter rejects most cases of severe English contamination in the Japanese corpus, including document-level paral-lel data (Figure 6) and phrase-level parallel data (Figure 7). In these examples, lines (separated by “\n”) shown in red are flagged by the filter. Because the fraction of flagged lines exceeds 5% in each document, the entire document is then removed. At the same time, the pipeline permits limited English that a typical Japanese speaker may en-counter or use in everyday life. For instance, in Figure 8, common short tokens such as “hit” and “ok,” as well as proper nouns such as “Access” and “Excel,” do not trigger the blocklist. Short phrases (e.g., “stay at home order,” “Reasons I Love You”) are also allowed; these represent an upper bound on the length of consecutive English segments that Dango is likely to have encountered during train-ing. 11 アクセス 数:0 hit ( 累計:15524 hit) 逆アクセス 数:0 hit (累計:6371 hit) ————————————   

> 応募資格IT 関連実務経験が少しでもあれ ばok ！Access 、Excel マクロ 経験ある 方は尚歓迎です ！／ ◆ブランク 3年程度 でもご 相談ください ◆
> ————————————
> ハワイ では 、3月22 日に州政府より 緊急 事態宣 言が発令され、翌日午後 4時より 4月30 日まで 不要不急の外出を禁止する
> “stay at home order” が発令されました 。この 法令は、生活
> に不可欠なサービス ・商品を提供している 機関 を除き、原則
> すべての 従業員は在宅勤務を行わなければならない 、という ものでした 。
> ————————————
> 今でも 年に2回は海外 へ行っているという 西野カナ さん。2016 年の新曲「あなたの 好きなところ 」は、52 枚のトラ ンプ に好きな 人の好きなところを 書いて プレゼント する ラブ レタ ー"52 Reasons I Love You" に着想を得て生まれた 曲
> だそう 。

Figure 8: English appearances that are allowed by the filtering pipeline. 

C L1 Model Pretraining Details 

We reproduced the customized Megatron-LM pre-training framework developed by llm-jp. 17 Most hyperparameters, such as model architecture and optimization settings, were kept identical to those of the official llm-jp-3 models (Table 3), except that we increased the global batch size from 512 to 1024. We set the learning-rate schedule to a maximum of 376B tokens to match the size of the L1-stage Japanese corpus, but trained for only 100B tokens. In contrast, the final released llm-jp-3 model is scheduled for 2.1T tokens in total. Thus, our model and the corresponding intermediate llm-jp-3 checkpoint represent partial progress along their respective full training trajectories. Pretrain-ing was conducted on 32 NVIDIA H200 GPUs (4 nodes × 8 GPUs) for approximately 26 hours. 

D Category Breakdown of Tasks in llm-jp-eval 

We exclude Code Generation (CG) and Math-ematical Reasoning (MR) from the evaluation suite because they are not directly related to our goal. We also exclude Machine Translation (MT; Japanese–English) because we intend to focus on evaluating Japanese proficiency using llm-jp-eval; we leave English evaluation to MultiBLiMP. In Figure 9, we find that models show mixed per-formance across task categories, with each model outperforming the other in different categories. 

> 17

https://github.com/llm-jp/scripts/tree/main/ pretrain/scripts 

Hyperparameter Value 

Model Architecture 

Layers 24 Hidden Size 2048 FFN Hidden Size 7168 Attention Heads 16 Sequence Length 4096 Positional Embeddings RoPE Activation Function SwiGLU Normalization RMSNorm (ϵ = 1 × 10 −5)Bias Disabled 

Optimization 

Optimizer Adam (β1, β 2 = 0 .9, 0.95 )Peak Learning Rate 3 × 10 −4

Min Learning Rate 3 × 10 −5

LR Scheduler Cosine Warmup Steps 180 Weight Decay 0.1 Gradient Clipping 1.0 Global Batch Size 1024 Precision bf16 Flash-attention True Z-Loss Strength 1 × 10 −4

Table 3: Model architecture and training hyperparame-ters. EL     

> FA
> HE
> MC
> NLI
> QA
> RC
> SUM
> 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
> Category breakdown of llm-jp-eval
> Dango-pretrained @ 100 B
> unfiltered-pretrained @ 100 B
> llm-jp-3-pretrained @ 100 B

Figure 9: Task category breakdown of llm-jp-eval per-formance. 

E Case Study on Dango’s English Competency After L1 Acquisition 

After completing L1 pretraining, we fine-tuned Dango-pretrained on the Ichikara instruction-following dataset, which includes a small number of Japanese–English translation examples. We then manually inspected the models’ English generation (translation) behavior. As shown in the upper block of Figure 10, for a relatively simple Japanese–English translation prompt, Dango occasionally captures local lexical correspondences (e.g., mapping “ 犬” to “dog”), but its output is typically unfaithful and ungrammatical at the sentence level. In contrast, llm-jp-3 captures 12 User :

> 「私は可愛 い犬がいる カフェ に行きました 。」 を英語で書いてください 。
> (translation: Write "I went to a cafe where there were cute dogs." in English. )
> Dango-pretrained-Ichikara :
> 「私は可愛 い犬がいる カフェ に行きました 。」 を英語に翻訳
> すると 、以下 のようになります 。
> I am beautiful dog. (translation: If you translate "......" to English, it becomes \n I am beautiful dog. )
> llm-jp-3-pretrained-Ichikara :I’m looking for a cute dog restaurant.
> User :
> 「彼女は、プレッシャ ーの中でも 落ち着いていられる 彼の能
> 力を感心して 話した 。」 を英語で書いてください 。
> (translation: Write "She spoke admiringly of his ability to stay calm under pressure." in English. )
> Dango-pretrained-Ichikara :""He is a hot day to meet you are not happen again’s hot day to meet you are not happen again’s hot day to meet you are not been happen. I love you, I love you."
> のように 書くと 良いでしょう 。
> (translation: You can write it as "......" )
> llm-jp-3-pretrained-Ichikara :
> 「彼女は、プレッシャ ーの中でも 落ち着いていられる 彼の能
> 力を感心して 話した 。」 を英語に翻訳 すると 、以下 のように なります 。
> I enjoyed listening to the story of the day because the conflict was resolved in a healthy way. (translation: If you translate "......" to English, it becomes \n ...... )

Figure 10: Case study of English production after com-pleting L1 pretraining and Ichikara instruction-tuning. 

more nuances and the grammar is correct. For a longer sentence (bottom block), Dango fails to preserve the meaning of the Japanese source and instead generates largely unrelated and repeti-tive English text. Nevertheless, parts of the output contain locally well-formed fragments (e.g., “you are not”, “I love you”), suggesting that the four-consecutive-English-word filter encourages learn-ing short-range English regularities (n-gram-level patterns) rather than maintaining global sentence semantics. llm-jp-3 also fails to translate the sen-tence faithfully in this case, but its output remains grammatically coherent and stylistically natural. 

F L2 Acquisition Data Synthesis Details 

F.1 Prompt for L2 Learning Data Generation 

Figure 11 showcases the prompt used to generate textbook-style L2 learning data with GPT-5.2. The deep orange block highlights the parallel sentence pair, which is used in evaluation (Figure 13). 

F.2 Prompt for L2 Acquisition Fine-tuning 

We show the prompt format used to fine-tune the models on the L2 learning data. We modified the user prompt and fine-tuned the models to learn GPT-5.2’s outputs; the assistant message is identi-cal to that in Figure 11. 

F.3 L2 Learning Data Length Statistics 

In Figure 14, we report the average sentence length (in words) in the test set of our LLM-generated L2 learning data. For comparison, we also report the sentence lengths of Dango and llm-jp-3’s English outputs from the Japanese–English translation task. For each CEFR-J level (e.g., B2), outputs are sam-pled from models trained on data up to that level (e.g., A1+A2+B1+B2). 

F.4 Prompt for Evaluating Models on Translation Task 

We show the prompt format used to evaluate the translation task in Figure 13. We place the source sentence in the assistant message rather than in the user prompt, and the model continues generating after “Translate this into Japanese/English:” (high-lighted in yellow). We adopt this format because it more closely matches what models see during L2 acquisition: the example sentence and its transla-tion appear together in the assistant message rather than in the user prompt. Empirically, we find that this format yields more stable translation outputs. 

G L2 Acquisition Fine-tuning Details 

We fine-tuned the LLMs using Axolotl. 18 All ex-periments were conducted on a single GPU without early stopping. The fine-tuning hyperparameters are shown in Table 4. 

Hyperparameter Value 

Training Setup 

Sequence Length 4096 Sample Packing False Num Epochs 3Micro Batch Size 4Gradient Accumulation Steps 4

Optimization 

Optimizer AdamW Learning Rate 2 × 10 −4

LR Scheduler Cosine Warmup Ratio 0.1 Weight Decay 0.1 

Table 4: Fine-tuning hyperparameters. 

> 18

https://github.com/axolotl-ai-cloud/axolotl/ 

13 You are a helpful linguist who will generate the explanation and usage given an English seed 

word ({seed}), its part of speech, and its CEFR level. 

In the first line, you should first explain the English word in Japanese. 

Then, you should make a new line saying " 単語 の翻訳 : ". Then, make a new line to provide 

translation of it, strictly following this format: "{seed}: 意味 1, 意味 2, ..." If you believe there is 

only 1 meaning that is commonly recognized, then you can stop at 意味 1. Do not go beyond 

意味 6. 

Then, you should make a new line and write an example sentence using the word, strictly 

following this format: " 例文 : This is an English sentence." When forming the sentence, you 

should only use words that are about the same level as or easier than the given seed word. 

Then, you should make a new line and write a Japanese translation for the example 

sentence, strictly following this format: " 日本語 に翻訳 すると : これは 英語 の文です。 "

Then, you should make a new line and point out what the key linguistic features are in the 

above example. You can, for example, explain verb conjugations, plural forms, and syntax 

structures, etc. Itemize them using ‘1. ’, ‘2. ’, etc. 

Adjust the difficulty of the example sentence according to the CEFR level. If the user 

specifies that it is an A1 level word, you should write an easy sentence with few grammar 

points to explain. If the user specifies a higher level such as B1, B2, C1, or C2, you should 

raise the complexity of your example sentence accordingly to include more difficult grammar 

and verb conjugations, etc. Do not mention the CEFR level in your response. Use plain text in 

your response, no formatting elements such as bold font (**). 

System Prompt 

Assistant Message (GPT -5.2 Output) 

elasticity, noun, CEFR level: C2 

User Promp t

elasticity は、 引っぱったり 押したりして 形が変わっても 元に戻ろう 

とする 性質、 または 状況 の変化 に合わせて 柔軟 に対応 できる 性

質を指します。 

単語 の翻訳 :

elasticity: 弾性（元 に戻る性質） , 柔軟性（適応力） 

例文 : The team showed remarkable elasticity when plans 

changed at the last minute. 

日本語 に翻訳 すると : そのチームは、 計画 が土壇場 で変わったと 

きに、 驚くほどの 柔軟性 を見せた。 

1. showed + 名詞 : 「（性質・態度 など）を 示した」という 基本構文 で、 

elasticity が「 示された 性質」 になっています。 

2. remarkable: 「remarkable elasticity 」で「 非常 に目立 つ／ 並外 

れた 柔軟性」 という 形容詞＋名詞 の組み合わせです。 

3. when + 節: 「when plans changed ... 」が時間・状況 を示す従属 

節で、 主節（ showed ... ）の出来事 が起きた 場面 を補足 しています。 

4. changed: 過去形 で、 出来事 がすでに 起きたことを 示します。 Figure 11: Prompt used to generate textbook-style L2 learning data. Assistant Message (Model learns this part) 

elasticity は、 引っぱったり 押したりして 形が変わっても 元に戻ろう 

とする 性質、 または 状況 の変化 に合わせて 柔軟 に対応 できる 性

質を指します。 

単語 の翻訳 :

elasticity: 弾性（元 に戻る性質） , 柔軟性（適応力） 

例文 : The team showed remarkable elasticity when plans 

changed at the last minute. 

日本語 に翻訳 すると : そのチームは、 計画 が土壇場 で変わったと 

きに、 驚くほどの 柔軟性 を見せた。 

1. showed + 名詞 : 「（性質・態度 など）を 示した」という 基本構文 で、 

elasticity が「 示された 性質」 になっています。 

2. remarkable: 「remarkable elasticity 」で「 非常 に目立 つ／ 並外 

れた 柔軟性」 という 形容詞＋名詞 の組み合わせです。 

3. when + 節: 「when plans changed ... 」が時間・状況 を示す従属 

節で、 主節（ showed ... ）の出来事 が起きた 場面 を補足 しています。 

4. changed: 過去形 で、 出来事 がすでに 起きたことを 示します。 

以下 の英単語 の意味 を日本語 で解釈 し、 単語 の翻訳例 を挙げな 

さい。また、その 単語 を使った 例文 と日本語 の翻訳 を作成 の上、 

例文中 に現れる 文法 の要点 を説明 しなさい。 

elasticity (noun) 

(Translation: Translate the meaning of the following English 

word into Japanese. Give translation examples. Then write an 

example sentence using the word with a Japanese translation, 

and explain the key grammar points in the sentence.) 

User Promp t

Figure 12: Prompt format used to train Dango and llm-jp-3 on the textbook-style L2 learning data. 

H L2 Development Assessment: English–Japanese Translation 

We observe similar trends in the Eng–Jpn direction in Figure 22. Because Dango is native in Japanese, it reaches strong performance on easier levels more quickly than in the Jpn–Eng direction. BLEU sat-urates earlier, and the performance gap relative to llm-jp-3 is smaller than in Japanese–English trans-lation. However, Dango still struggles with gen-eralization to unseen difficulty levels compared to llm-jp-3, especially when evaluated on harder data than it has seen during training. 例文 : The team showed remarkable elasticity when plans 

changed at the last minute. 

日本語 に翻訳 すると : そのチームは、 計画 が土壇場 で変わったと 

きに、 驚くほどの 柔軟性 を見せた。 

Assistant Message 

When tested on translation task, 

model continue generating from here. 

以下 の英単語で英文を作成し、日本語に翻訳 しなさい。 

elasticity (noun) 

(Translation: Write an English sentence using the following 

word and translate it into Japanese. 

User Promp t

Figure 13: Prompt format used to evaluate the models on the translation task. The model continues generating after the source sentence appears in the assistant mes-sage, only producing the highlighted yellow part. 

I L2 Development Assessment: Does BLEU Capture Proficiency Development? 

We conduct a human evaluation to examine whether the observed BLEU improvement reflects meaningful gains in linguistic development, rather than only changes in an automatic metric. To assess the validity of BLEU as a proxy, we perform a blinded human evaluation across two Dango checkpoints trained on different proficiency ranges. Specifically, we compare a checkpoint trained on A1–B1 data with one trained on A1– B2 data, and evaluate both on B2-level test exam-ples. This setting corresponds to “Dango, trained on A1+A2+B1 / A1+A2+B1+B2, tested on B2” in Figure 4. Since B2 is out-of-distribution for the A1–B1 checkpoint, this comparison probes the seen/unseen proficiency boundary and provides an informative test of whether additional proficiency-14 Figure 14: Sentence length distribution of the LLM-generated L2 learning data.        

> Model BLEU Avg. human correctness (1–5)
> Dango [A1–B1] 17.9 2.76 Dango [A1–B2] 27.8 3.04
> Table 5: Human evaluation results on the B2 test set (n= 50 ).

level training improves adequacy. A human annotator (one of the author) with C2-level English proficiency, who is a non-native speaker, blindly (not knowing which model pro-duced the output) rated each model output on a 1–5 correctness scale, with the GPT-5.2 generated translation as gold reference. A score of 5 indi-cates a fully correct translation with no omissions or unrelated content, 3 indicates that at least one key meaning unit is missing or mistranslated, and 1 indicates that the output is completely incorrect or unrelated. As shown in Table 5, the checkpoint with the higher BLEU score also receives a higher average human correctness score. This suggests that, in this setting, BLEU tracks meaningful improvements in translation adequacy, although it should still be interpreted as an automatic proxy rather than a direct measure of L2 proficiency development. 

I.1 Case Study on Error Pattern and Proficiency Development 

We present a case study examining Dango’s error patterns and proficiency development. As shown in Figure 17, Dango exhibits human-like L2 errors, such as article omission and non-native phrasing. As it is exposed to more training data, it success-fully learns to avoid these mistakes. 

J L2 Human-like Linguistic Feature Assessment Details 

We adopted the framework of Gao et al. (2025) to extract linguistic features and measure their usage frequency and error rate in model translations and human English productions. Following their setup, we used GPT-4o as the annotator with temperature set to 0, and parsed each instance once. 

Prompt Designs. Since Gao et al. (2025) origi-nally designed prompts for dialogue annotation, we adapted their prompts for single-sentence model outputs by instructing the LLM to annotate one sentence at a time. For human English productions, we further adapted the prompts for written essays in the main experiment. Each essay was split into 5-sentence chunks, and sentences with fewer than 4 words were skipped. For the extended analysis on IC-NALE Spoken Dialogues (Appendix J.2), we used the original dialogue-based prompt design. The full prompt set follows Gao et al. (2025) and their repository. 19 

We show the prompt designs used for single-sentence model outputs. Figure 15 presents the system prompt with general instructions for lin-guistic feature extraction, while Figure 16 gives the user prompt for parsing the Number Agreement 

category. All prompts used in our experiments will be released in the open-source repository for the camera-ready version. 

J.1 L2 Linguistic Feature Distribution Construction and JSD/BCD Calculation 

The construction of linguistic feature profiles fol-lows the same procedure for both usage frequency (UF) and error rate (ER). For each model or human learner group, we first aggregate the judge annota-tions across the seven linguistic feature categories. For UF, we count how often each feature category appears (even if the usage is wrong). For ER, we compute the proportion of incorrect instances when they appear within each feature category. For Jensen–Shannon divergence (JSD), both UF and ER vectors are normalized into probability dis-tributions before comparison. That is, given a non-negative feature vector x = ( x1, . . . , x K ) over K

> 19 https://github.com/RenaGao/LLMPirorknowledge/ tree/main

15 You are a language expert specializing in doing text annotation in the English second language. You will be instructed to mak e a nnotations to a given text         

> based on some linguistics aspects to evaluate grammatical features in L2 texts.
> The given text sample is from a second language speaker of English.
> Make sure to keep the annotation format without any change in passage when giving the annotation output.
> You should annotate targeted grammatical features in the given text.
> If the text has multiple tokens/phrases that need to be annotated, you should list all the token/phrase annotations separatel y a s follows:
> {
> "type": "the targeted grammatical feature",
> "annotation_utterance ": "the utterance of annotation target"
> "annotation_tokens ": [
> {"token": "the token of annotation target",
> "grammar correctness": the annotated grammar feature is aligned with the native English speaker's grammar usage. This ca n also be False if the
> annotated token is involved with additional errors that are not aligned with native speakers even when it's beyond the target ed linguistic phenomena.
> "rationale": "the reason why you give the annotation and judge it as correct or incorrect",
> },
> {"token": "the other token of annotation target",
> "grammar correctness": the annotated grammar feature is aligned with the native English speaker's grammar usage. This ca n also be False if the
> annotated token is involved with additional errors that are not aligned with native speakers even when it's beyond the target ed linguistic phenomena.
> "rationale": "the reason why you give the annotation and judge it as correct or incorrect",
> }
> ]
> }
> If exactly same token/phrase is repeated in the text, you should repeatedly annotate them separately (we care about the frequ enc y of grammatical
> features).
> Please return json objects and do not include any other information in the output. The output will be single combined json objects if you find multiple
> utterances that need to be annotated (e.g., in a list) and also make sure it's satisfying json format (e.g.: [{obj1}, {obj2}, {obj3}]).

System Prompt Figure 15: System prompt for linguistic feature annotation. We build on the framework of Gao et al. (2025); text in red indicates our modifications. 

feature categories, we normalize it as 

pi = xi

PKj=1 xj

.

We then compute JSD between two normalized distributions p and q:

JSD( p, q) = 12 KL( p ∥ m) + 12 KL( q ∥ m),

m = 12 (p + q).

In addition to JSD, we use Bray–Curtis dissim-ilarity (BCD) for ER comparison. Unlike JSD, BCD is computed directly on the unnormalized ER vectors and therefore preserves differences in the raw magnitude of category-wise error tendencies. Given two nonnegative ER vectors x and y, BCD is defined as 

BCD( x, y) = 

PKi=1 |xi − yi|

PKi=1 (xi + yi) .

A BCD value of 0 indicates identical ER profiles, while larger values indicate greater dissimilarity. Thus, JSD captures relative distributional shifts of UF and ER across feature categories, whereas BCD complements it by measuring the direct dis-crepancy between unnormalized ER profiles. 

J.2 Human-like L2 Linguistic Feature Assessment: Additional Analysis with Human Spoken Dialogues 

We further evaluate transfer effects using another source of human English production, ICNALE Spo-ken Dialogues (Ishikawa, 2019). 

Model JSD of UF JSD of ER BCD of ER Training-based methods 

Dango 0.0100 0.0214 0.1491 

Unfiltered 0.0113 0.0554 0.4184 llm-jp-3 0.0153 0.0593 0.7847 

Prompting-based methods 

llm-jp-3.1-instruct 0.0179 0.0743 0.8973 GPT-4o 0.0140 0.0104 0.3761 

GPT-5.5 0.0104 0.0186 0.1123 

Table 6: LLM output linguistic feature distribution divergences to human Spoken Dialogue produced by Japanese learners. Lower is more similar. 

Overall, the results show a trend similar to that in 5.3. In Table 6, Dango ranks first in modeling hu-man transfer effects for UF JSD, third for ER JSD, and second for ER BCD. GPT-5.5 also remains a strong prompting-based baseline. Table 7 shows that Dango’s English production largely aligns with that of Japanese learners. En-glish produced by Korean speakers is again closest to Dango’s production, likely because Japanese and Korean share similar word order, grammati-cal structures, and particle systems. We also find that the JSDs, especially ER JSD, roughly reflect the structural similarity of these languages from Japanese. 16 TASK: Read the provided dialogue passage. 

Find all the utterances in the passage that have grammatical 

number agreement specifically between adjective/determiners 

and nouns and annotate all the corresponding tokens under 

the agreement. 

Example: 

Passage: 

Yes, I like speaking English. 

Uh, because English can use all over the world. You can use it 

speak to anyone. 

Uh, in Japan ---I just speak English in my English class. 

Uh, it's about the English book and the topic is in that book. 

About a school life .

Or my hobby. 

Yes, I want more chance to speak. 

What, uh, like more, uh, sports. 

Or games. 

{

"type": "Number agreement", 

"annotation_utterance ": "Yes, I want more chance to speak.', 

"annotation_tokens ":[ 

{" token":"more chance", 

"grammar correctness": False, 

"rationale": "The word 'more' indicate that the modified 

noun has to be plural. However, the modified noun 'chance' is 

singular. Note that 'chance' is countable here considering its 

meaning (opportunity).", 

}, 

]

}

{

"type": "Number agreement", 

"annotation_utterance ": "About a school life.", 

"annotation_tokens ":[ 

{"token": "a school life", 

"grammar correctness": True, 

"rationale": "The determiner 'a' is for a singular noun, and 

the noun 'life' is singular.", 

}, 

]

}

The text for you to annotate: {text} 

User Prompt Figure 16: User prompt for annotating Numbers Agree-ment .

Human L1 JSD of UF JSD of ER BCD of ER 

Japanese 0.0100 0.0214 0.1491 

Korean 0.0136 0.0180 0.1496 

Urdu 0.0123 0.0257 0.1778 Mandarin 0.0142 0.0253 0.1430 

Cantonese 0.0131 0.0436 0.2140 Thai 0.0162 0.0303 0.1818 Malay 0.0112 0.0404 0.1863 

Table 7: Linguistic feature divergences between Dango and humans with different L1 backgrounds. Human English production is from ICNALE Spoken Dialogue. 

Japanese source : 最終的な決定をする 前に、私たちは リス クを評価する 必要があります 。

GT : We need to assess the risks before we make a final decision. 

Dango [A1–B1] on B2 :We need to review risk before we decide the final decision. 

Correctness : 4/5 (article omission: “review the risk”; non-native phrasing: “decide a decision”) 

Dango [A1–B2] on B2 :We need to consider the risk before we make a final decision. 

Correctness : 5/5 (comprehensible) 

Figure 17: Case study of Dango’s English production quality across training levels. 

Figure 18: Usage Frequency distribution of human and LLMs for calculating JSD. 

Figure 19: Error Rate distribution of human and LLMs for calculating JSD. 

17 Language Family Order Relation to Japanese (Distance) Japanese Japonic SOV Baseline 

Korean Koreanic SOV Closest : Similar syntax & particle system 

Urdu Indo-Aryan SOV Close : Similar SOV structure 

Mandarin Sino-Tibetan SVO Distant : Different word order, partial shared script 

Cantonese Sino-Tibetan SVO Distant : Different word order, partial shared script 

Thai Kra-Dai SVO Furthest : SVO + Adjectives follow nouns 

Malay Austronesian SVO Furthest : SVO + Adjectives follow nouns 

Table 8: Languages ranked by structural similarity to Japanese. 

Subcategory by whitelist by English by Chinese Total Dropped # docs after filtering 

CommonCrawl 6.89% 23.00% 0.17% 29.96% 295,309,943 Kaken 13.13% 54.67% 0.00% 67.80% 2,228,758 WARP HTML 2.61% 13.03% 0.07% 15.70% 1,659,736 WARP PDF 14.10% 8.61% 0.18% 22.84% 35,528,902 Wikipedia 7.35% 23.82% 0.22% 31.32% 1,364,529 Overall 7.67% 21.65% 0.17% 29.39% 336,091,868 

Table 9: Statistics of the Japanese corpus after filtering. 

Japanese source : 私は踊ることが 好きです 。

Model : I like dance. 

GT : I like dancing. (gerund omission: “like dance” instead of like dancing”) 

Japanese source : 私は夕方にテレビ を見ます 。

Model : I watch TV at evening. 

GT : I watch TV in the evening. (preposition error: “at evening” instead of “in the evening”) 

Japanese source : 彼女はみんなを 助けるので 、天使のよう な人です 。

Model : She is a angel who helps people. 

GT : She is an angel because she helps everyone. (article form error: “a angel” instead of an angel”) 

Japanese source : この テレビ 番組は勉強になります 。

Model : This TV shows is studying. 

GT : This TV show is educational. (non-native phrasing: literal mistranslation of the Japanese idiom “benkyou ni naru”; unnecessary plural: “This TV shows”) 

Japanese source : その 犬は私の足を攻撃しました 。

Model : The dog attack my leg. 

GT : The dog attacked my leg. (tense omission: “attack” instead of “attacked”) 

Figure 20: Case study of grammatical and phrasing errors in Dango’s English production. Task: Translate the Japanese sentence to English that looks 

like it is produced by a Japanese speaker (a Second -Language 

learner). 

**Profile of the Speaker (Second -Language Speaker, 

Japanese)**: 

- A non -native English speaker whose proficiency reflects an 

intermediate -to -upper -intermediate level. 

- Their native language is Japanese, please follow the 

idiomatic expressions and cultural nuances commonly used by 

Japanese speakers. 

(…...) 

**An example of how a Japanese native speaker speaks 

English:** 

**Speaker A (NS):** Thank you for joining today! Can you 

introduce yourself briefly? 

**Speaker B (L2, Japanese):** Ah, yes, thank you. My name is 

Kenta. I from Tokyo. I study... um, computer... computer thing. 

**Speaker A (NS):** Computer science? 

**Speaker B (L2, Japanese):** Yes! Computer science. I study 

it four year in university. 

(…...) 

Source sentence: {text} 

Generate a translation of the source sentence into English, 

strictly following this format: 

Translation: {translation} 

User Prompt 

Figure 21: L1 knowledge injection user prompt for L2 role-playing. The original prompt is from Gao et al. (2025); text in red indicates our modifications. 

18 Figure 22: Dango and llm-jp-3 when trained and evaluated on different levels of Japanese-English data, showing L2 development progress. The stair-shaped black line separates seen levels (lower left) from unseen levels (upper right). Your goal is to translate a Japanese sentence into English, mimicking how a Japanese speaker (a Second -Language learner) would t ranslate it. 

Read the provided Japanese dialogue and learn about the grammatical traits of Japanese from the analysis. 

Scene: Two friends, Sora and Aki, are discussing their plan to visit Kyoto. They talk about sightseeing, food, and transporta tio n. 

# Dialogue data 

Sora: 

こんにちは、 明日何 をする 予定 ですか？ 

(Konnichiwa , ashita nani o suru yotei desu ka?) 

“Hello, what are your plans for tomorrow?” 

Aki: 

明日 は特に予定 がありませんが、どうしてですか？ 

(Ashita wa toku ni yotei ga arimasen ga, doushite desu ka?) 

“I don’t have any particular plans for tomorrow. Why do you ask?” 

(......) 

# Analysis of Grammatical Traits 

1.Particles: 

•“ は” (wa ): Topic particle in “ 明日 は” (ashita wa ) indicating the topic is “tomorrow.” 

•“ を” (o): Object marker in “ 食べ物を” (tabemono o) indicating “food” as the object of eating. 

•“ に” (ni ): Direction particle in “ 駅で待ち合わせましょうか” (eki de machiawase mashou ka) to indicate meeting at the station. 

2.Politeness Levels: 

•Polite speech with ” -ます” (masu ) endings: “ 行きたいと 思っています” (ikitai to omotteimasu ) and “ 調べましたか” (shirabemashita ka). 

•Casual forms could replace these for informal conversations. 

3.Verb Conjugations: 

•“ 行きたい” (ikitai ): Expressing desire to go. 

•“ 思っています” (omotteimasu ): Continuous form indicating ongoing thought. 

•“ 高いかもしれません” (takai kamoshiremasen ): Expressing possibility with “ かもしれません” (kamoshiremasen ). 

(......) 

Make sure to follow the idiomatic expressions and cultural nuances commonly used by Japanese speakers. 

Use the traits in the provided dialogue example and analysis to guide your translation, ensuring that it reflects typical lin gui stic influences from Japanese, 

such as grammatical mistakes and limited vocabulary. 

System Prompt 

Figure 23: L1 knowledge injection system prompt for L2 role-playing. The original prompt is from Gao et al. (2025); text in red indicates our modifications. 

Filter Parameter Value Unicode Whitelist Allowed Scripts Japanese (Kana), CJK Ideographs, ASCII, Emoji, Punctuation Document Rejection Threshold > 0.1% non-whitelisted characters 

English (Latin) 

Ratio Threshold > 0.40 (Latin chars / Total chars) Max Consecutive Latin Words > 4

Max Latin Length > 20 characters Min Latin Length (Ignored) < 8 characters Document Rejection Threshold > 5.0% violated lines 

Chinese Blocklist Source Unihan BMP Document Rejection Threshold > 0.1% violated lines 

Table 10: Filtering parameters and thresholds. 

19 あなたは 日本語 ネイティブで、 日本語 の文を英語 に翻訳 します。ただし、 

あなたの 英語 は母語話者 レベルではないため、 英訳 に文法 ミスが 含ま

れることがあります。 必ず、 日本語話者 がしそうな 文法 ミスを 含むように 

英訳 を作成 してください。 具体的 な文法 ミスは、 以下 の例を参考 にしてよ 

い。 

モダリティ（ 助動詞・関連表現） 

カテゴリ 名（日本語）： モダリティ（ 助動詞・関連表現） 

説明：可能性・能力・許可・義務 を示す助動詞 や表現（ can, must, may, 

have to など）の 用法誤 りを 含む文。 

例文： She must be finish the report today. 

名詞 ‐動詞 コロケーション 

カテゴリ 名（日本語）：名詞 ‐動詞 コロケーション 

説明：名詞 と動詞 の自然 な結びつき（ make an effort など）の 取り違え・ 

不自然 な組み合わせを 含む文。 

例文： We did an effort to solve it quickly. 

形容詞・限定詞 と名詞 の数一致 

カテゴリ 名（日本語）：限定詞／形容詞 と名詞 の数一致 

説明： this/these, that/those, a/an などの 限定詞（ や形容詞） と名詞 の

単数・複数 が一致 していない 文。 

例文： Those car are expensive. 

数量詞・数詞 

カテゴリ 名（日本語）：数量詞・数詞表現 

説明： many/much, few/little, two/three などの 数量表現 が可算・不可 

算や単位 と合わない 文。 

例文： There are many information in the file. 

照応語（参照語） 

カテゴリ 名（日本語）：照応語（参照語） 

説明：代名詞・指示語（ he, she, it, this, that など）の 参照先 が曖昧／不 

適切 な文。 

例文： When Sarah met Anna, she smiled. 

主語 ‐動詞一致（人称・数） 

カテゴリ 名（日本語）：主語 ‐動詞 の人称・数一致 

説明：主語 の人称・単複 と動詞形（ is/are, was/were, go/goes など）が 一

致していない 文。 

例文： The students was tired. 

時制 と時間表現 の整合 

カテゴリ 名（日本語）：時制 と時間表現 の整合（時制一致） 

説明： yesterday/tomorrow/last year/now などの 時間表現 と動詞時制 

が噛み合っていない 文。 

例文： Yesterday, I go to the store. 

返答 は「 英訳 : 」で始まるように 作り、そして 訳文以外 のものは 一切出力 

しないこと。 

この 日本語 の文を英語 に翻訳 しなさい。 

{source_sentence }

User Prompt 

You are a native Japanese speaker, and you translate Japanese 

sentences into English. However, your English is not at a native -

speaker level, so your translations may contain grammatical errors. 

Make sure that the English translation includes grammatical errors 

that Japanese speakers are likely to make. You may refer to the 

following examples for specific types of grammatical errors. 

Modality (auxiliaries and related expressions) 

Category name: Modality (auxiliaries and related expressions) 

Description: Sentences containing errors in the use of auxiliaries 

and expressions indicating possibility, ability, permission, or 

obligation, such as can, must, may, and have to. 

Noun –verb collocations 

Category name: Noun –verb collocations 

Description: Sentences containing unnatural or incorrect 

combinations of nouns and verbs, such as confusing natural 

collocations like make an effort. 

Number agreement between determiners/adjectives and nouns 

Category name: Number agreement between 

determiners/adjectives and nouns 

Description: Sentences in which determiners such as this/these, 

that/those, or a/an do not agree in number with the noun. 

Quantifiers and numerals 

Category name: Quantifiers and numeral expressions 

Description: Sentences in which quantity expressions such as 

many/much, few/little, or numerals such as two/three do not match 

countability or units. 

Anaphoric expressions / referential expressions 

Category name: Anaphoric expressions / referential expressions 

Description: Sentences in which pronouns or demonstratives such 

as he, she, it, this, or that have ambiguous or inappropriate 

referents. 

Subject –verb agreement in person and number 

Category name: Subject –verb agreement in person and number 

Description: Sentences in which the subject’s person or number 

does not agree with the verb form, such as is/are, was/were, or 

go/goes. 

Consistency between tense and time expressions 

Category name: Consistency between tense and time expressions 

Description: Sentences in which time expressions such as 

yesterday, tomorrow, last year, or now do not match the verb tense. 

Start your response with “English translation: ” and output nothing 

except the translated sentence. 

Translate the following Japanese sentence into English. 

{source_sentence }

User Prompt (Translated from Japanese) Figure 24: Our simplified L1 knowledge-injection prompt for L2 role-playing, designed for llm-jp-3.1-instruct. System prompt was not used for llm-jp-3.1-instruct. The prompt on the left was used in the experiment, while the prompt on the right is its English translation for reference. 

20